# WORDPAIR: Germany German
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Germany
# SENT:  Germany, officially the Federal Republic of Germany, is a country in Central Europe.
# SENT:  Germany is situated between the Baltic and North seas to the north, and the Alps to the south; it covers an area of 357,022 square kilometres (137,847 sq mi), with a population of almost 84 million within its 16 constituent states.
# SENT:  Germany borders Denmark to the north, Poland and the Czech Republic to the east, Austria and Switzerland to the south, and France, Luxembourg, Belgium, and the Netherlands to the west.
# SENT:  Various Germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern Germany since classical antiquity.
# SENT:  A region named Germania was documented before AD 100.
# SENT:  In 962, the Kingdom of Germany formed the bulk of the Holy Roman Empire.
# SENT:  During the 16th century, northern German regions became the centre of the Protestant Reformation.
# SENT:  Following the Napoleonic Wars and the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, the German Confederation was formed in 1815.
# SENT:  Formal unification of Germany into the modern nation-state was commenced on 18 August 1866 with the North German Confederation Treaty establishing the Prussia-led North German Confederation later transformed in 1871 into the German Empire.
# SENT:  After World War I and the German Revolution of 1918–1919, the Empire was in turn transformed into the semi-presidential Weimar Republic.
# SENT:  After the end of World War II in Europe and a period of Allied occupation, in 1949, Germany as a whole was organized into two separate polities with limited sovereignity: the Federal Republic of Germany, generally known as West Germany, and the German Democratic Republic, East Germany, while Berlin de jure continued its Four Power status.
# SENT:  The Federal Republic of Germany was a founding member of the European Economic Community and the European Union, while the German Democratic Republic was a communist Eastern Bloc state and member of the Warsaw Pact.
# SENT:  After the fall of communist led-government in East Germany, German reunification saw the former East German states join the Federal Republic of Germany on 3 October 1990—becoming a federal parliamentary republic.
# SENT:  Germany is a great power with a strong economy; it has the largest economy in Europe, the world's fourth-largest economy by nominal GDP and the fifth-largest by PPP.
# SENT:  Germany is a member of the United Nations, the European Union, NATO, the Council of Europe, the G7, the G20 and the OECD.
# SENT:  The English word Germany derives from the Latin Germania, which came into use after Julius Caesar adopted it for the peoples east of the Rhine.
# SENT:  The German term Deutschland, originally diutisciu land ('the German lands') is derived from deutsch (cf.
# SENT:  Dutch), descended from Old High German diutisc 'of the people' (from diot or diota 'people'), originally used to distinguish the language of the common people from Latin and its Romance descendants.
# SENT:  This in turn descends from Proto-Germanic *þiudiskaz 'of the people' (see also the Latinised form Theodiscus), derived from *þeudō, descended from Proto-Indo-European *tewtéh₂- 'people', from which the word Teutons also originates.
# SENT:  Pre-human ancestors, the Danuvius guggenmosi, who were present in Germany over 11 million years ago, are theorized to be among the earliest ones to walk on two legs.
# SENT:  Ancient humans were present in Germany at least 600,000 years ago.
# SENT:  The Nebra sky disk, created during the European Bronze Age, has been attributed to a German site.
# SENT:  The Germanic peoples are thought to date from the Nordic Bronze Age, early Iron Age, or the Jastorf culture.
# SENT:  From southern Scandinavia and northern Germany, they expanded south, east, and west, coming into contact with the Celtic, Iranian, Baltic, and Slavic tribes.Under Augustus, the Roman Empire began to invade lands inhabited by the Germanic tribes, creating a short-lived Roman province of Germania between the Rhine and Elbe rivers.
# SENT:  By 100 AD, when Tacitus wrote Germania, Germanic tribes had settled along the Rhine and the Danube (the Limes Germanicus), occupying most of modern Germany.
# SENT:  Around 260, Germanic peoples broke into Roman-controlled lands.
# SENT:  After the invasion of the Huns in 375, and with the decline of Rome from 395, Germanic tribes moved farther southwest: the Franks established the Frankish Kingdom and pushed east to subjugate Saxony and Bavaria, and areas of what is today eastern Germany were inhabited by Western Slavic tribes.
# SENT:  In 996, Gregory V became the first German Pope, appointed by his cousin Otto III, whom he shortly after crowned Holy Roman Emperor.
# SENT:  The Holy Roman Empire absorbed northern Italy and Burgundy under the Salian emperors (1024–1125), although the emperors lost power through the Investiture Controversy.Under the Hohenstaufen emperors (1138–1254), German princes encouraged German settlement to the south and east (Ostsiedlung).
# SENT:  Members of the Hanseatic League, mostly north German towns, prospered in the expansion of trade.
# SENT:  From the Cologne War through the Thirty Years' Wars (1618–1648), religious conflict devastated German lands and significantly reduced the population.The Peace of Westphalia ended religious warfare among the Imperial Estates; their mostly German-speaking rulers were able to choose Roman Catholicism, Lutheranism, or the Reformed faith as their official religion.
# SENT:  Following the War of the Austrian Succession and the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, Charles VI's daughter Maria Theresa ruled as empress consort when her husband, Francis I, became emperor.From 1740, dualism between the Austrian Habsburg monarchy and the Kingdom of Prussia dominated German history.
# SENT:  In 1806 the Imperium was dissolved; France, Russia, Prussia and the Habsburgs (Austria) competed for hegemony in the German states during the Napoleonic Wars.
# SENT:  Following the fall of Napoleon, the Congress of Vienna founded the German Confederation, a loose league of 39 sovereign states.
# SENT:  In light of revolutionary movements in Europe, intellectuals and commoners started the revolutions of 1848 in the German states, raising the German question.
# SENT:  Bismarck successfully concluded the war with Denmark in 1864; the subsequent decisive Prussian victory in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 enabled him to create the North German Confederation which excluded Austria.
# SENT:  After the defeat of France in the Franco-Prussian War, the German princes proclaimed the founding of the German Empire in 1871.
# SENT:  Prussia was the dominant constituent state of the new empire; the King of Prussia ruled as its Kaiser, and Berlin became its capital.In the Gründerzeit period following the unification of Germany, Bismarck's foreign policy as chancellor of Germany secured Germany's position as a great nation by forging alliances and avoiding war.
# SENT:  However, under Wilhelm II, Germany took an imperialistic course, leading to friction with neighbouring countries.
# SENT:  Britain, France and Russia also concluded alliances to protect against Habsburg interference with Russian interests in the Balkans or German interference against France.
# SENT:  At the Berlin Conference in 1884, Germany claimed several colonies including German East Africa, German South West Africa, Togoland, and Kamerun.
# SENT:  Later, Germany further expanded its colonial empire to include holdings in the Pacific and China.
# SENT:  After four years of warfare, in which approximately two million German soldiers were killed, a general armistice ended the fighting.
# SENT:  In the German Revolution (November 1918), Emperor Wilhelm II and the ruling princes abdicated their positions, and Germany was declared a federal republic.
# SENT:  Germany's new leadership signed the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, accepting defeat by the Allies.
# SENT:  Germans perceived the treaty as humiliating, which was seen by historians as influential in the rise of Adolf Hitler.
# SENT:  Germany lost around 13% of its European territory and ceded all of its colonial possessions in Africa and the Pacific.
# SENT:  On 11 August 1919, President Friedrich Ebert signed the democratic Weimar Constitution.
# SENT:  The worldwide Great Depression hit Germany in 1929.
# SENT:  The Nazi Party led by Adolf Hitler became the largest party in the Reichstag after a special election in 1932 and Hindenburg appointed Hitler as chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933.
# SENT:  On 23 March 1933, the Enabling Act gave Hitler unrestricted legislative power, overriding the constitution, and marked the beginning of Nazi Germany.
# SENT:  Germany also reacquired control of the Saarland in 1935, remilitarised the Rhineland in 1936, annexed Austria in 1938, annexed the Sudetenland in 1938 with the Munich Agreement, and in violation of the agreement occupied Czechoslovakia in March 1939.
# SENT:  On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland, beginning World War II in Europe; Britain and France declared war on Germany on 3 September.
# SENT:  In the spring of 1940, Germany conquered Denmark and Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and France, forcing the French government to sign an armistice.
# SENT:  By 1942, Germany and its allies controlled most of continental Europe and North Africa, but following the Soviet victory at the Battle of Stalingrad, the Allied reconquest of North Africa and invasion of Italy in 1943, German forces suffered repeated military defeats.
# SENT:  In 1944, the Soviets pushed into Eastern Europe; the Western allies landed in France and entered Germany despite a final German counteroffensive.
# SENT:  Following Hitler's suicide during the Battle of Berlin, Germany signed the surrender document on 8 May 1945, ending World War II in Europe and Nazi Germany.
# SENT:  Around 12 million ethnic Germans were expelled from across Eastern Europe, and Germany lost roughly one-quarter of its pre-war territory.
# SENT:  After Nazi Germany surrendered, the Allies partitioned Berlin and Germany's remaining territory into four occupation zones.
# SENT:  The western sectors, controlled by France, the United Kingdom, and the United States, were merged on 23 May 1949 to form the Federal Republic of Germany (German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland); on 7 October 1949, the Soviet Zone became the German Democratic Republic (GDR) (German: Deutsche Demokratische Republik; DDR).
# SENT:  They were informally known as West Germany and East Germany.
# SENT:  East Germany selected East Berlin as its capital, while West Germany chose Bonn as a provisional capital, to emphasise its stance that the two-state solution was temporary.West Germany was established as a federal parliamentary republic with a "social market economy".
# SENT:  Starting in 1948 West Germany became a major recipient of reconstruction aid under the American Marshall Plan.
# SENT:  Konrad Adenauer was elected the first federal chancellor of Germany in 1949.
# SENT:  West Germany joined NATO in 1955 and was a founding member of the European Economic Community.East Germany was an Eastern Bloc state under political and military control by the Soviet Union via occupation forces and the Warsaw Pact.
# SENT:  Although East Germany claimed to be a democracy, political power was exercised solely by leading members (Politbüro) of the communist-controlled Socialist Unity Party of Germany, supported by the Stasicode: deu promoted to code: de , an immense secret service.
# SENT:  The Berlin Wall, built in 1961, prevented East German citizens from escaping to West Germany, becoming a symbol of the Cold War.Tensions between East and West Germany were reduced in the late 1960s by Chancellor Willy Brandt's Ostpolitik.
# SENT:  In 1989, Hungary decided to dismantle the Iron Curtain and open its border with Austria, causing the emigration of thousands of East Germans to West Germany via Hungary and Austria.
# SENT:  In an effort to help retain East Germany as a state, the East German authorities eased border restrictions, but this actually led to an acceleration of the Wende reform process culminating in the Two Plus Four Treaty under which Germany regained full sovereignty.
# SENT:  United Germany was considered the enlarged continuation of West Germany so it retained its memberships in international organisations.
# SENT:  Based on the Berlin/Bonn Act (1994), Berlin again became the capital of Germany, while Bonn obtained the unique status of a Bundesstadt (federal city) retaining some federal ministries.
# SENT:  The relocation of the government was completed in 1999, and modernisation of the East German economy was scheduled to last until 2019.Since reunification, Germany has taken a more active role in the European Union, signing the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 and the Lisbon Treaty in 2007, and co-founding the Eurozone.
# SENT:  Germany sent a peacekeeping force to secure stability in the Balkans and sent German troops to Afghanistan as part of a NATO effort to provide security in that country after the ousting of the Taliban.In the 2005 elections, Angela Merkel became the first female chancellor.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:50, WORD1_SENTS:0, WORD2_SENTS:23
# WORDPAIR: Telengana Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyderabad
# SENT:  Hyderabad ( (listen) HY-dər-ə-bad; Telugu: [ˈɦaɪ̯daraːbaːd], Urdu: [ˈɦɛːdəɾaːbaːd]) is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Telangana and the de jure capital of Andhra Pradesh.
# SENT:  With an average altitude of 542 m (1,778 ft), much of Hyderabad is situated on hilly terrain around artificial lakes, including the Hussain Sagar lake, predating the city's founding, in the north of the city centre.
# SENT:  According to the 2011 Census of India, Hyderabad is the fourth-most populous city in India with a population of 6.9 million residents within the city limits, and has a population of 9.7 million residents in the metropolitan region, making it the sixth-most populous metropolitan area in India.
# SENT:  With an output of US$74 billion, Hyderabad has the fifth-largest urban economy in India.
# SENT:  Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah established Hyderabad in 1591 to extend the capital beyond the fortified Golconda.
# SENT:  Hyderabad served as the imperial capital of the Asaf Jahi's from 1769 to 1948.
# SENT:  As capital of the princely state of Hyderabad, the city housed the British Residency and cantonment until Indian independence in 1947.
# SENT:  Hyderabad was annexed by the Indian Union in 1948 and continued as a capital of Hyderabad State from 1948 to 1956.
# SENT:  After the introduction of the States Reorganisation Act of 1956, Hyderabad was made the capital of the newly formed Andhra Pradesh.
# SENT:  In 2014, Andhra Pradesh was split to form the state of Telangana, and Hyderabad became the joint capital of the two states with a transitional arrangement scheduled to end in 2024.
# SENT:  Until the 19th century Hyderabad was known for the pearl industry and was nicknamed the "City of Pearls", and was the only trading centre for Golconda diamonds in the world.
# SENT:  Hyderabad's central location between the Deccan Plateau and the Western Ghats, and industrialisation throughout the 20th century attracted major Indian research, manufacturing, educational and financial institutions.
# SENT:  The formation of the special economic zones of Hardware Park and HITEC City, dedicated to information technology, has encouraged leading multinationals to set up operations in Hyderabad.
# SENT:  The name Hyderabad means "Haydar's city" or "lion city", from haydar 'lion' and ābād 'city', after Caliph Ali Ibn Abi Talib, also known as Haydar because of his lion-like valour in battle.The city was originally called Baghnagar "city of gardens", and later acquired the name Hyderabad.
# SENT:  The city would have been named Hyderabad in her honour.
# SENT:  The discovery of Megalithic burial sites and cairn circles in the suburbs of Hyderabad, in 1851 by Philip Meadows Taylor, a polymath in the service of the Nizam, had provided evidence that the region in which the city stands has been inhabited from the Stone Age.
# SENT:  The region comprising modern Hyderabad and its surroundings was ruled by the Chalukya dynasty from 624 CE to 1075 CE.
# SENT:  Following the dissolution of the Chalukya empire into four parts in the 11th century, Golconda—now part of Hyderabad—came under the control of the Kakatiya dynasty from 1158, whose seat of power was at Warangal—148 km (92 mi) northeast of modern Hyderabad.
# SENT:  In 1347 when Ala-ud-Din Bahman Shah, a governor under bin Tughluq, rebelled against Delhi and established the Bahmani Sultanate in the Deccan Plateau, with Gulbarga—200 km (124 mi) west of Hyderabad—as its capital, both the neighboring rulers Musunuri Nayakas of Warangal and Bahmani Sultans of Gulbarga engaged in many wars until 1364–65 when a peace treaty was signed and the Musunuri Nayakas ceded Golconda Fort to the Bahmani Sultan.
# SENT:  The fifth Qutb Shahi sultan, Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, established Hyderabad on the banks of the Musi River in 1591, to avoid water shortages experienced at Golconda.
# SENT:  Mir Momin Astarabadi, the prime minister in the Qutub Shahi period, developed the plan of the city of Hyderabad, including the location of the Charminar and Char Kaman.On 21 September 1687, the Golconda Sultanate came under the rule of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb after a year-long siege of the Golconda Fort.
# SENT:  The annexed city "Hyderabad" was renamed Darul Jihad (House of War), whereas the main territories of the Golconda Sultanate were incorporated into the Mughal empire as the province Hyderabad Subah.
# SENT:  Mughal rule in Hyderabad was administered by three main governors: Jan Sipar Khan (1688–1700), his son Rustam Dil Khan (1700–13) and Mubariz Khan (1713–24).
# SENT:  In 1713, Mughal emperor Farrukhsiyar appointed Mubariz Khan as Governor of Hyderabad.
# SENT:  : 93–94  In 1724, Asaf Jah I defeated Mubariz Khan to establish autonomy over the Deccan, named the region Hyderabad Deccan, and started what came to be known as the Asaf Jahi dynasty.
# SENT:  Subsequent rulers retained the title Nizam ul-Mulk and were referred to as Asaf Jahi Nizams, or Nizams of Hyderabad.
# SENT:  In 1768 he signed the Treaty of Masulipatam—by which the East India Company in return for a fixed annual rent, got the right to control and collect the taxes at Coromandel Coast.In 1769 Hyderabad city became the formal capital of the Asaf Jahi Nizams.
# SENT:  In response to regular threats from Hyder Ali (Dalwai of Mysore), Baji Rao I (Peshwa of the Maratha Empire), and Basalath Jung (Asaf Jah II's elder brother, who was supported by French General the Marquis de Bussy-Castelnau), the Nizam signed a subsidiary alliance with the East India Company in 1798, allowing the British Indian Army to be stationed at Bolarum (modern Secunderabad) to protect the state's capital, for which the Nizams paid an annual maintenance to the British.Until 1874 there were no modern industries in Hyderabad.
# SENT:  With the introduction of railways in the 1880s, four factories were built to the south and east of Hussain Sagar lake, and during the early 20th century, Hyderabad was transformed into a modern city with the establishment of transport services, underground drainage, running water, electricity, telecommunications, universities, industries, and Begumpet Airport.
# SENT:  The Nizams ruled the princely state of Hyderabad during the British Raj.
# SENT:  The Hyderabad State Congress, with the support of the Indian National Congress and the Communist Party of India, began agitating against Nizam VII in 1948.
# SENT:  On 17 September that year, the Indian Army took control of Hyderabad State after an invasion codenamed Operation Polo.
# SENT:  The Constitution of India, which became effective on 26 January 1950, made Hyderabad State one of the part B states of India, with Hyderabad city continuing to be the capital.
# SENT:  In his 1955 report Thoughts on Linguistic States, B. R. Ambedkar, then chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Indian Constitution, proposed designating the city of Hyderabad as the second capital of India because of its amenities and strategic central location.On 1 November 1956 the states of India were reorganised by language.
# SENT:  Hyderabad state was split into three parts, which were merged with neighbouring states to form Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
# SENT:  The nine Telugu- and Urdu-speaking districts of Hyderabad State in the Telangana region were merged with the Telugu-speaking Andhra State to create Andhra Pradesh, with Hyderabad as its capital.
# SENT:  On 30 July 2013 the government of India declared that part of Andhra Pradesh would be split off to form a new Telangana state and that Hyderabad city would be the capital city and part of Telangana, while the city would also remain the capital of Andhra Pradesh for no more than ten years.
# SENT:  Hyderabad is 1,566 km (973 mi) south of Delhi, 699 km (434 mi) southeast of Mumbai, and 570 km (350 mi) north of Bangalore by road.
# SENT:  Greater Hyderabad covers 650 km2 (250 sq mi), making it one of the largest metropolitan areas in India.
# SENT:  With an average altitude of 542 m (1,778 ft), Hyderabad lies on predominantly sloping terrain of grey and pink granite, dotted with small hills, the highest being Banjara Hills at 672 m (2,205 ft).
# SENT:  Hyderabad has a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen Aw) bordering on a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen BSh).
# SENT:  May is the hottest month, when daily temperatures range from 26–39 °C (79–102 °F); December, the coldest, has temperatures varying from 14.5–28 °C (58.1–82.4 °F).Heavy rain from the south-west summer monsoon falls between June and October, supplying Hyderabad with most of its mean annual rainfall.
# SENT:  Hyderabad's lakes and the sloping terrain of its low-lying hills provide habitat for an assortment of flora and fauna.
# SENT:  Hyderabad has three national parks (Mrugavani National Park, Mahavir Harina Vanasthali National Park and Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park), and the Manjira Wildlife Sanctuary is about 50 km (31 mi) from the city.
# SENT:  Hyderabad's other environmental reserves are: Kotla Vijayabhaskara Reddy Botanical Gardens, Ameenpur Lake, Shamirpet Lake, Hussain Sagar, Fox Sagar Lake, Mir Alam Tank and Patancheru Lake, which is home to regional birds and attracts seasonal migratory birds from different parts of the world.
# SENT:  Organisations engaged in environmental and wildlife preservation include the Telangana Forest Department, Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), the Animal Welfare Board of India, the Blue Cross of Hyderabad and the University of Hyderabad.
# SENT:  According to the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 part 2 Section 5: "(1) On and from the appointed day, Hyderabad in the existing State of Andhra Pradesh, shall be the common capital of the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh for such period not exceeding ten years.
# SENT:  (2) After the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (1), Hyderabad shall be the capital of the State of Telangana and there shall be a new capital for the State of Andhra Pradesh."
# SENT:  The same sections also define that the common capital includes the existing area designated as the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation under the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955.
# SENT:  The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) oversees the civic infrastructure of the city, there are six administrative zones of GHMC: South Zone–(Charminar), East Zone–(L. B. Nagar), West Zone–(Serilingampally), North Zone–(Kukatpally), Northeast Zone–(Secunderabad) and Central Zone–(Khairatabad); these zones consist of 30 "circles", which together encompass 150 municipal wards.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telangana
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geography_of_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographics_of_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyderabad_State_(1948%E2%80%931956)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_neighbourhoods_in_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tourist_attractions_in_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Administrative_divisions_of_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy_of_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Neighbourhoods_in_Hyderabad,_India
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Crime_in_Hyderabad,_India
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Old_City_(Hyderabad,_India)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Wikipedians_in_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Companies_based_in_Hyderabad,_India
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ameerpet
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Hospitals_in_Hyderabad,_India
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/University_of_Hyderabad
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Organisations_based_in_Hyderabad,_India
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nagole
# WORDPAIR: Thailand Thai
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thailand
# SENT:  Thailand ( TY-land, TY-lənd), historically known as Siam () and officially the Kingdom of Thailand, is a country in Southeast Asia, located at the centre of the Indochinese Peninsula, spanning 513,120 square kilometres (198,120 sq mi), with a population of almost 70 million.
# SENT:  The country is bordered to the north by Myanmar and Laos, to the east by Laos and Cambodia, to the south by the Gulf of Thailand and Malaysia, and to the west by the Andaman Sea and the extremity of Myanmar.
# SENT:  Thailand also shares maritime borders with Vietnam to the southeast, and Indonesia and India to the southwest.
# SENT:  Indianised kingdoms such as the Mon, Khmer Empire and Malay states ruled the region, competing with Thai states such as the Kingdoms of Ngoenyang, Sukhothai, Lan Na and Ayutthaya, which also rivalled each other.
# SENT:  Following a bloodless revolution in 1932, it became a constitutional monarchy and changed its official name to Thailand, becoming an ally of Japan in World War II.
# SENT:  Thailand became a major ally of the United States, and played an anti-communist role in the region as a member of the failed SEATO, but from 1975 sought to improve relations with Communist China and Thailand's neighbours.
# SENT:  Apart from a brief period of parliamentary democracy in the mid-1970s, Thailand has periodically alternated between democracy and military rule.
# SENT:  Since the 2000s the country has been caught in continual bitter political conflict between supporters and opponents of Thaksin Shinawatra, which resulted in two coups (in 2006 and 2014), along with the establishment of its current constitution, a nominally democratic government after the 2019 Thai general election, and large pro-democracy protests in 2020–2021 which included unprecedented demands to reform the monarchy.
# SENT:  Since 2019, it has been nominally a parliamentary constitutional monarchy; in practice, however, structural advantages in the constitution have ensured the military's hold on power.Thailand is a middle power in global affairs and a founding member of ASEAN, and ranks very high in the Human Development Index.
# SENT:  Thailand is classified as a newly industrialised economy, with manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism as leading sectors.
# SENT:  Thailand, officially the Kingdom of Thailand, was known by outsiders prior to 1949 as Siam.
# SENT:  According to George Cœdès, the word Thai (ไทย) means 'free man' in the Thai language, "differentiating the Thai from the natives encompassed in Thai society as serfs".
# SENT:  : 197  According to Chit Phumisak, Thai (ไท) simply means 'people' or 'human being', his investigation shows that some rural areas used the word "Thai" instead of the usual Thai word khon (คน) for people.
# SENT:  According to Michel Ferlus, the ethnonyms Thai-Tai (or Thay-Tay) would have evolved from the etymon *k(ə)ri: 'human being'.Thais often refer to their country using the polite form prathet Thai (Thai: ประเทศไทย), they also use the more colloquial term mueang Thai (Thai: เมืองไทย) or simply Thai; the word mueang, archaically referring to a city-state, is commonly used to refer to a city or town as the centre of a region.
# SENT:  Ratcha Anachak Thai (Thai: ราชอาณาจักรไทย) means 'kingdom of Thailand' or 'kingdom of Thai'.
# SENT:  The Thai National Anthem (Thai: เพลงชาติ), written by Luang Saranupraphan during the patriotic 1930s, refers to the Thai nation as prathet Thai (Thai: ประเทศไทย).
# SENT:  The first line of the national anthem is: prathet thai ruam lueat nuea chat chuea thai (Thai: ประเทศไทยรวมเลือดเนื้อชาติเชื้อไทย), 'Thailand is the unity of Thai flesh and blood'.
# SENT:  This usage of the name in the country's first international treaty gave the name Siam official status, until 24 June 1939 when it was changed to "Thailand".
# SENT:  Thailand was briefly renamed Siam from 1946 to 1948, after which it again reverted to "Thailand".
# SENT:  There is evidence of continuous human habitation in present-day Thailand from 20,000 years ago to the present day.
# SENT:  : 4  The site of Ban Chiang in northeast Thailand currently ranks as the earliest known centre of copper and bronze production in Southeast Asia.
# SENT:  : 5  The Indochina peninsula was heavily influenced by the culture and religions of India from the time of the Kingdom of Funan to that of the Khmer Empire.The Thai people are of the Tai ethnic group, characterised by common linguistic roots.
# SENT:  While there are many assumptions regarding the origin of Tai peoples, David K. Wyatt, a historian of Thailand, argued that their ancestors which at the present inhabit Laos, Thailand, Myanmar, India, and China came from the Điện Biên Phủ area between the 5th and the 8th century.
# SENT:  : 6  Thai people began migrating into present-day Thailand around the 11th century, which Mon and Khmer people occupied at the time.
# SENT:  Thus Thai culture was influenced by Indian, Mon, and Khmer cultures.According to French historian George Cœdès, "The Thai first enter history of Farther India in the eleventh century with the mention of Syam slaves or prisoners of war in Champa epigraphy", and "in the twelfth century, the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat" where "a group of warriors" are described as Syam.
# SENT:  He later crowned himself the first king of Sukhothai Kingdom in 1238.: 52–3  Mainstream Thai historians count Sukhothai as the first kingdom of Thai people.
# SENT:  : 55–6  He is believed have invented Thai script and Thai ceramics were an important export in his era.
# SENT:  His forces engaged in wars with Burma, Laos, and Cambodia, which successfully drove the Burmese out of Lan Na in 1775,: 225  captured Vientiane in 1778: 227–8  and tried to install a pro-Thai king in Cambodia in the 1770s.
# SENT:  : 350–3  Thailand is the only Southeast Asian nation never to have been colonised by a Western power, in part because Britain and France agreed in 1896 to make the Chao Phraya valley a buffer state.
# SENT:  The advent of the monthon system marked the creation of the modern Thai nation-state.
# SENT:  : 397  Vajiravudh (r. 1910–1925) responded by propaganda for the entirety of his reign,: 402  which promoted the idea of the Thai nation.
# SENT:  : 28 In 1939, there was a decree changing the name of the country from "Siam" to "Thailand".
# SENT:  In 1941, Thailand was in a brief conflict with Vichy France resulting in Thailand gaining some Lao and Cambodian territories.
# SENT:  : 462 On 8 December 1941, the Empire of Japan launched an invasion of Thailand, and fighting broke out shortly before Phibun ordered an armistice.
# SENT:  Japan was granted free passage, and on 21 December Thailand and Japan signed a military alliance with a secret protocol, wherein the Japanese government agreed to help Thailand regain lost territories.
# SENT:  The Thai government declared war on the United States and the United Kingdom.
# SENT:  : 465  The Free Thai Movement was launched both in Thailand and abroad to oppose the government and Japanese occupation.
# SENT:  : 465–6  After the war ended in 1945, Thailand signed formal agreements to end the state of war with the Allies.
# SENT:  The main Allied powers had ignored Thailand's declaration of war.
# SENT:  Thailand joined the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) to become an active ally of the United States in 1954.: 493  Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat launched a coup in 1957, which removed Khana Ratsadon from politics.
# SENT:  : 514  After the United States joined the Vietnam War in 1961, there was a secret agreement wherein the U.S. promised to protect Thailand.
# SENT:  : 523 The period brought about increasing modernisation and Westernisation of Thai society.
# SENT:  Rural farmers gained class consciousness and were sympathetic to the Communist Party of Thailand.
# SENT:  : 541–3  Bhumibol installed Sanya Dharmasakti (premiership 1973–1975) to replace him, marking the first time that the king had intervened in Thai politics directly since 1932.
# SENT:  : 548  This culminated in the Thammasat University massacre in October 1976.: 548–9  A coup d'état on that day brought Thailand a new ultra-right government, which cracked down on media outlets, officials, and intellectuals, and fuelled the communist insurgency.
# SENT:  Thailand had its first elected prime minister in 1988.Suchinda Kraprayoon, who was the coup leader in 1991 and said he would not seek to become prime minister, was nominated as one by the majority coalition government after the 1992 general election.
# SENT:  The 1997 Asian financial crisis originated in Thailand and ended the country's 40 years of uninterrupted economic growth.
# SENT:  : 576  The populist Thai Rak Thai party, led by prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra, governed from 2001 until 2006.
# SENT:  A South Thailand insurgency escalated starting from 2004.
# SENT:  The pro-Thaksin United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD) protested both in 2009 and in 2010, the latter of which ended with a violent military crackdown causing more than 70 civilian deaths.After the general election of 2011, the populist Pheu Thai Party won a majority and Yingluck Shinawatra, Thaksin's younger sister, became prime minister.
# SENT:  The referendum and adoption of Thailand's current constitution happened under the junta's rule.
# SENT:  Totalling 513,120 square kilometres (198,120 sq mi), Thailand is the 50th-largest country by total area.
# SENT:  It is slightly smaller than Yemen and slightly larger than Spain.Thailand comprises several distinct geographic regions, partly corresponding to the provincial groups.
# SENT:  The centre of the country is dominated by the predominantly flat Chao Phraya river valley, which runs into the Gulf of Thailand.
# SENT:  Southern Thailand consists of the narrow Kra Isthmus that widens into the Malay Peninsula.
# SENT:  The diversity of the regions is the most pronounced attribute of Thailand's physical setting.
# SENT:  The Chao Phraya and the Mekong River are the indispensable water courses of rural Thailand.
# SENT:  The Gulf of Thailand covers 320,000 square kilometres (124,000 sq mi) and is fed by the Chao Phraya, Mae Klong, Bang Pakong, and Tapi Rivers.
# SENT:  The eastern shore of the Gulf of Thailand is an industrial centre of Thailand with the kingdom's premier deepwater port in Sattahip and its busiest commercial port, Laem Chabang.
# SENT:  Thailand's climate is influenced by monsoon winds that have a seasonal character (the southwest and northeast monsoon).
# SENT:  A year in Thailand is divided into three seasons.
# SENT:  : 2  Most of Thailand experiences dry weather with mild temperatures.
# SENT:  : 3  Due to their inland position and latitude, the north, northeast, central and eastern parts of Thailand experience a long period of warm weather, where temperatures can reach up to 40 °C (104 °F) during March to May,: 3  in contrast to close to or below 0 °C (32 °F) in some areas in winter.
# SENT:  : 3  Southern Thailand is characterised by mild weather year-round with less diurnal and seasonal variations in temperatures due to maritime influences.
# SENT:  : 2 Thailand is among the world's ten countries that are most exposed to climate change.
# SENT:  National parks in Thailand are defined as an area that contains natural resources of ecological importance or unique beauty, or flora and fauna of special importance.
# SENT:  Thailand's protected areas include 156 national parks, 58 wildlife sanctuaries, 67 non-hunting areas, and 120 forest parks.
# SENT:  Thailand has a mediocre but improving performance in the global Environmental Performance Index (EPI) with an overall ranking of 91 out of 180 countries in 2016.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:50, WORD1_SENTS:0, WORD2_SENTS:18
# WORDPAIR: Islamabad Pakistan
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Islamabad
# SENT:  The city of Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan, is located on the Pothohar Plateau within the Islamabad Capital Territory—one of the earliest known sites of human settlement in Asia.
# SENT:  Modern Islamabad also incorporates the old settlement of Saidpur.
# SENT:  When Pakistan gained independence in 1947, Karachi was its first capital.
# SENT:  In 1960, Islamabad was constructed as a forward capital.
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islamabad
# SENT:  Islamabad ( (listen); Urdu: اسلام آباد, Islām-ābād) is the capital city of Pakistan.
# SENT:  It is the country's ninth-most populous city, with a population of over 1.2 million people, and is federally administered by the Pakistani government as part of the Islamabad Capital Territory.
# SENT:  Built as a planned city in the 1960s, it replaced Rawalpindi as Pakistan's national capital.
# SENT:  The city is notable for its high standards of living, safety, cleanliness, and abundant greenery.Greek architect Constantinos Apostolou Doxiadis developed Islamabad's master plan, in which he divided it into eight zones; administrative, diplomatic enclave, residential areas, educational and industrial sectors, commercial areas, as well as rural and green areas administered by the Islamabad Metropolitan Corporation with support from the Capital Development Authority.
# SENT:  Islamabad is known for the presence of several parks and forests, including the Margalla Hills National Park and the Shakarparian.
# SENT:  Other prominent landmarks include the Pakistan Monument and Democracy Square.Rated as Gamma + by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, Islamabad has the highest cost of living in Pakistan.
# SENT:  The city's populace is dominated by both middle and upper-middle class citizens.Islamabad is home to twenty universities, including Bahria University, Quaid-e-Azam University, PIEAS, COMSATS University, and NUST.
# SENT:  It is also rated as one of the safest cities in Pakistan, and has an expansive RFID-enabled surveillance system with almost 2000 active CCTV cameras.
# SENT:  The name Islamabad means City of Islam.
# SENT:  Islam refers to the religion of Islam, Pakistan's state religion, and -abad is a Persian suffix meaning cultivated place, indicating an inhabited place or city.
# SENT:  According to a history book by Muhammad Ismail Zabeeh, a school teacher from Arifwala known as Qazi Abdur Rehman Amritsari proposed the name of the city.Occasionally in writing, Islamabad is colloquially abbreviated ISB.
# SENT:  Such usage originated in SMS language, in part due to the IATA location identifier for the Islamabad International Airport.
# SENT:  Islamabad Capital Territory, located on the Pothohar Plateau of the northern Punjab region, is considered one of the earliest sites of human settlement in Asia.
# SENT:  When Pakistan gained independence in 1947, the southern port city of Karachi was its provisional national capital.
# SENT:  In the 1960s, Islamabad was constructed as a forward capital for several reasons.
# SENT:  Pakistan needed a capital that was easily accessible from all parts of the country.
# SENT:  The newly selected location of Islamabad was closer to the army headquarters in Rawalpindi and the disputed territory of Kashmir in the north.Greek firm of architects, led by Konstantinos Apostolos Doxiadis, designed the master plan of the city based on a grid plan which was triangular in shape with its apex towards the Margalla Hills.
# SENT:  The capital was not moved directly from Karachi to Islamabad; it was first shifted temporarily to Rawalpindi in the early 60s, and then to Islamabad when essential development work was completed in 1966.
# SENT:  In 1981, Islamabad separated from Punjab province to form Capital Territory.
# SENT:  Islamabad has attracted people from all over Pakistan, making it one of the most cosmopolitan and urbanised cities of Pakistan.
# SENT:  Islamabad has experienced a series of terrorist incidents including the July 2007 Siege of Lal Masjid (Red Mosque), the June 2008 Danish embassy bombing, and the September 2008 Marriott bombing.
# SENT:  In 2011, four terrorism incidents occurred in the city, killing four people, including the murder of the Punjab Governor Salmaan Taseer.Construction of the Rawalpindi-Islamabad Metrobus, the region's first mass transit line, began in February 2014 and was completed in March 2015.
# SENT:  Islamabad is located at 33.43°N 73.04°E﻿ / 33.43; 73.04 at the northern edge of the Pothohar Plateau and at the foot of the Margalla Hills in Islamabad Capital Territory.
# SENT:  Islamabad is located 120 kilometres (75 mi) SSW of Muzaffarabad, 185 kilometres (115 mi) east of Peshawar and 295 kilometres (183 mi) NNW of Lahore.
# SENT:  The city of Islamabad expanses an area of 906 square kilometres (350 sq mi).
# SENT:  Islamabad has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen: Cwa), with five seasons: Winter (November–February), Spring (March and April), Summer (May and June), Rainy Monsoon (July and August) and Autumn (September and October).
# SENT:  Islamabad's micro-climate is regulated by three artificial reservoirs: Rawal, Simli, and Khanpur Dam.
# SENT:  The latter is located on the Haro River near the town of Khanpur, about 40 kilometres (25 mi) from Islamabad.
# SENT:  Simli Dam is 30 kilometres (19 mi) north of Islamabad.
# SENT:  Loi Bher Forest is situated along the Islamabad Highway, covering an area of 1,087 acres (440 ha).
# SENT:  On 23 July 2001, Islamabad received a record-breaking 620 mm (24 in) of rainfall in just 10 hours.
# SENT:  It was the heaviest rainfall in Islamabad in the past 100 years and the highest rainfall in 24 hours as well.
# SENT:  The Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) Administration, generally known as ICT Administration or Islamabad Administration, is the civil administration as well as main law and order agency of the Federal Capital.
# SENT:  The local government authority of the city is the Islamabad Metropolitan Corporation (IMC) with some help from Capital Development Authority (CDA), which oversees the planning, development, construction, and administration of the city.
# SENT:  Islamabad Capital Territory is divided into eight zones: Administrative Zone, Commercial District, Educational Sector, Industrial Sector, Diplomatic Enclave, Residential Areas, Rural Areas and Green Area.
# SENT:  Islamabad city is divided into five major zones: Zone I, Zone II, Zone III, Zone IV, and Zone V. Out of these, Zone IV is the largest in area.
# SENT:  F-5 is an important sector for the software industry in Islamabad, as the two software technology parks are located here.
# SENT:  Some important places include the Jinnah Convention Centre and Serena Hotel in G-5, the Red Mosque in G-6, the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences, the largest medical complex in the capital, located in G-8, and the Karachi Company shopping center in G-9.
# SENT:  CDA is planning to set up Islamabad Railway Station in Sector I-18 and Industrial City in sector I-17.
# SENT:  Zone IV and V consist of Islamabad Park, and rural areas of the city.
# SENT:  When the master plan for Islamabad was drawn up in 1960, Islamabad and Rawalpindi, along with the adjoining areas, was to be integrated to form a large metropolitan area called Islamabad/Rawalpindi Metropolitan Area.
# SENT:  The area would consist of the developing Islamabad, the old colonial cantonment city of Rawalpindi, and Margalla Hills National Park, including surrounding rural areas.
# SENT:  However, Islamabad city is part of the Islamabad Capital Territory, while Rawalpindi is part of Rawalpindi District, which is part of province of Punjab.Initially, it was proposed that the three areas would be connected by four major highways: Murree Highway, Islamabad Highway, Soan Highway, and Capital Highway.
# SENT:  However, to date only two highways have been constructed: Kashmir Highway (the former Murree Highway) and Islamabad Highway.
# SENT:  Islamabad is the hub all the governmental activities while Rawalpindi is the centre of all industrial, commercial, and military activities.
# SENT:  Islamabad's architecture is a combination of modernity and old Islamic and regional traditions.
# SENT:  The beige-coloured edifice is trimmed with blue tile works in Islamic tradition, and is one of Islamabad's tallest buildings.
# SENT:  Other examples of intertwined Islamic and modern architecture include Pakistan Monument and Faisal Mosque.
# SENT:  Other notable structures are: Secretariat Complex designed by Gio Ponti, Prime Minister's secretariat based on Mughal architecture and the National Assembly by Edward Durell Stone.The murals on the inside of the large petals of Pakistan Monument are based on Islamic architecture.
# SENT:  The Centaurus is an example of modern architecture under construction in Islamabad.
# SENT:  The seven star hotel was designed by WS Atkins PLC.The newly built Islamabad Stock Exchange Towers is another example of modern architecture in the city.
# SENT:  Islamabad has the highest literacy rate in Pakistan, at 88%.
# SENT:  The labour force of Islamabad is 185,213 and the unemployment rate is 15.70%.
# SENT:  Islamabad is a net contributor to the Pakistani economy, as whilst having only 0.8% of the country's population, it contributes 1% to the country's GDP.
# SENT:  Islamabad Stock Exchange, founded in 1989, is Pakistan's third largest stock exchange after Karachi Stock Exchange and Lahore Stock Exchange, and was merged to form Pakistan Stock Exchange.
# SENT:  The average daily turnover of the stock exchange is over 1 million shares.According to the World Bank's Doing Business Report of 2010, Islamabad was ranked as the best place to start a business in Pakistan.
# SENT:  Islamabad's businesses are Pakistan's most compliant for paying tax dues.
# SENT:  Islamabad is home to many migrants from other regions of Pakistan and has a cultural and religious diversity of considerable antiquity.
# SENT:  Thousands of devotees from across Pakistan attend the annual Urs of Bari Imam.
# SENT:  In 2004, the Urs was attended by more than 1.2 million people.The Lok Virsa Museum in Islamabad preserves a wide variety of expressions of folk and traditional cultural legacy of Pakistan.
# SENT:  It is located near the Shakarparian hills and boasts a large display of embroidered costumes, jewellery, musical instruments, woodwork, utensils and folkloristic objects from the region and other parts of Pakistan.
# SENT:  One of the landmarks for tourists is the Pakistan Monument built in 2007 located in Islamabad.
# SENT:  This tourist attraction represents the patriotism and sovereignty of Pakistan.
# SENT:  The design is shaped as a dome with petal-shaped walls that are engraved with arts portraying Pakistan's other tourist landmarks such as the Badshahi Mosque, Minar-e-Pakistan and Lahore Fort.
# SENT:  Islamabad holds some of Pakistan's most prestigious museums such as Lok Virsa Museum, Institute of Folk and Traditional Heritage Shakarparian Park and prominent galleries such as the National Art Gallery and Gallery 6.
# SENT:  The living culture of Islamabad and Pakistan is best explored at Lok Virsa Museum, as well as the Institute of Folk and Traditional Heritage in Shakarparian Park.
# SENT:  Islamabad boasts the highest literacy rate in Pakistan at 98%, and has some of the most advanced educational institutes in the country.
# SENT:  The higher education institutes in the capital are either federally chartered or administered by private organisations and almost all of them are recognised by the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan.
# SENT:  Most of the top ranked universities; National University of Sciences and Technology, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology and Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences, also have their headquarters in the capital.
# SENT:  Other universities include Air University, Bahria University, Center for Advanced Studies in Engineering, Federal Urdu University of Arts, Science and Technology, Hamdard University, National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences, Capital University of Science & Technology, National Defence University, Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University, National University of Modern Languages, Iqra University, International Islamic University, Virtual University of Pakistan, Muhammad Ali Jinnah University, The University of Lahore, Abasyn University, and The Millennium University College.
# SENT:  The largest hospital in Islamabad is Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) hospital.
# SENT:  PIMS consists of five academic institutes: Quaid-e-Azam Postgraduate Medical College, College of Nursing, College of Medical Technology, School of Nursing, and Mother and Child Health Center.PAEC General Hospital and teaching institute, established in 2006, is affiliated with the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission.
# SENT:  According to the Federal Bureau of Statistics of the Government of Pakistan, in 2008 there were 12 hospitals, 76 dispensaries, and five maternity and child welfare centers in the city with a total of 5,158 beds.
# SENT:  The airport is the largest in Pakistan and is located south-west of Islamabad.
# SENT:  Work is being done to keep it along the Kashmir Highway.The city is served by Pakistan Railways at Islamabad railway station.
# SENT:  The city is home to Islamabad United, which won the first ever Pakistan Super League in 2016 and second title in 2018, and Islamabad All Stars, which participates in the Super Kabaddi League.
# SENT:  Islamabad also has various rock climbing spots in the Margalla Hills.The Pakistan Sports Complex has three swimming pools for children.
# SENT:  Located in Islamabad, Pakistan, the Faisal Mosque is the largest mosque in South Asia and the fourth largest mosque in the world.
# SENT:  Located in Islamabad, the Pakistan National Monument is a representation of the four provinces and three territories of the nation.
# SENT:  Designed by the famous architect, Arif Masood, this blooming flower shaped structure reflects the progress and prosperity of Pakistan.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pakistan
# SENT:  Pakistan (Urdu: پاکِستان [ˈpaːkɪstaːn]), officially the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (اِسلامی
# SENT:  Pakistan is the 33rd-largest country in the world by area and the second-largest in South Asia, spanning 881,913 square kilometres (340,509 square miles).
# SENT:  Pakistan is the site of several ancient cultures, including the 8,500-year-old Neolithic site of Mehrgarh in Balochistan, the Indus Valley civilisation of the Bronze Age, the most extensive of the civilisations of the Afro-Eurasia, and the ancient Gandhara civilization.
# SENT:  The region that comprises the modern state of Pakistan was the realm of multiple empires and dynasties, including the Achaemenid; briefly that of Alexander the Great; the Seleucid, the Maurya, the Kushan, the Gupta; the Umayyad Caliphate in its southern regions, the Hindu Shahis, the Ghaznavids, the Delhi Sultanate, the Mughals, the Durranis, the Omani Empire, the Sikh Empire, British East India Company rule, and most recently, the British Indian Empire from 1858 to 1947.
# SENT:  Spurred by the Pakistan Movement, which sought a homeland for the Muslims of British India, and election victories in 1946 by the All-India Muslim League, Pakistan gained independence in 1947 after the Partition of the British Indian Empire, which awarded separate statehood to its Muslim-majority regions and was accompanied by an unparalleled mass migration and loss of life.
# SENT:  Initially a Dominion of the British Commonwealth, Pakistan officially drafted its constitution in 1956, and emerged as a declared Islamic republic.
# SENT:  In 1971, the exclave of East Pakistan seceded as the new country of Bangladesh after a nine-month-long civil war.
# SENT:  In the following four decades, Pakistan has been ruled by governments whose descriptions, although complex, commonly alternated between civilian and military, democratic and authoritarian, relatively secular and Islamist.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:23, WORD1_SENTS:42, WORD2_SENTS:27
# WORDPAIR: Nigeria Africa
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nigeria
# SENT:  Nigeria (  ny-JEER-ee-ə), officially the Federal Republic of Nigeria, is a country in West Africa.
# SENT:  It covers an area of 923,769 square kilometres (356,669 sq mi), and with a population of over 225 million, it is the most populous country in Africa, and the world's sixth-most populous country.
# SENT:  Nigeria borders Niger in the north, Chad in the northeast, Cameroon in the east, and Benin in the west.
# SENT:  Nigeria is a federal republic comprising 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory, where the capital, Abuja, is located.
# SENT:  The largest city in Nigeria is Lagos, one of the largest metropolitan areas in the world and the second-largest in Africa.
# SENT:  Nigeria has been home to several indigenous pre-colonial states and kingdoms since the second millennium BC, with the Nok civilization in the 15th century BC, marking the first internal unification in the country.
# SENT:  The modern state originated with British colonialization in the 19th century, taking its present territorial shape with the merging of the Southern Nigeria Protectorate and Northern Nigeria Protectorate in 1914 by Lord Lugard.
# SENT:  The British set up administrative and legal structures while practising indirect rule through traditional chiefdoms in the Nigeria region.
# SENT:  Nigeria became a formally independent federation on 1 October 1960.
# SENT:  The 2015 general election was the first time an incumbent president failed to be re-elected.Nigeria is a multinational state inhabited by more than 250 ethnic groups speaking 500 distinct languages, all identifying with a wide variety of cultures.
# SENT:  Nigeria's constitution ensures freedom of religion and it is home to some of the world's largest Muslim and Christian populations.
# SENT:  Nigeria is divided roughly in half between Muslims, who live mostly in the north, and Christians, who live mostly in the south; indigenous religions, such as those native to the Igbo and Yoruba ethnicities, are in the minority.Nigeria is a regional power in Africa and a middle and emerging power in international affairs.
# SENT:  Nigeria's economy is the largest in Africa, the 31st-largest in the world by nominal GDP, and 26th-largest by PPP.
# SENT:  Nigeria is often referred to as the Giant of Africa owing to its large population and economy and is considered to be an emerging market by the World Bank.
# SENT:  Nigeria is a founding member of the African Union and a member of many international organizations, including the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, NAM, the Economic Community of West African States, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and OPEC.
# SENT:  The name Nigeria was taken from the Niger River running through the country.
# SENT:  The Nok civilization of Nigeria thrived between 1,500 BC and AD 200.
# SENT:  It produced life-sized terracotta figures that are some of the earliest known sculptures in Sub-Saharan Africa and smelted iron by about 550 BC and possibly a few centuries earlier.
# SENT:  Evidence of iron smelting has also been excavated at sites in the Nsukka region of southeast Nigeria: dating to 2000 BC at the site of Lejja and to 750 BC and at the site of Opi.
# SENT:  Since the populations were partially affiliated with the Arab Muslim culture of North Africa, they began Trans-Saharan trade and were referred to by the Arabic speakers as Al-Sudan (meaning "The Blacks") as they were considered an extended part of the Muslim world.
# SENT:  In West Africa, the oldest bronzes made using the lost wax process were from Igbo-Ukwu, a city under Nri influence.The Yoruba kingdoms of Ife and Oyo in southwestern Nigeria became prominent in the 12th and 14th centuries, respectively.
# SENT:  In the 16th century, Portuguese explorers were the first Europeans to begin important, direct trade with peoples of southern Nigeria, at the port they named Lagos (formerly Eko) and in Calabar along the region Slave Coast.
# SENT:  The port of Calabar on the historical Bight of Biafra (now commonly referred to as the Bight of Bonny) became one of the largest slave-trading posts in West Africa in the era of the transatlantic slave trade.
# SENT:  Other major slaving ports in Nigeria were located in Badagry, Lagos on the Bight of Benin and Bonny Island on the Bight of Biafra.
# SENT:  Slave routes were established throughout Nigeria linking the hinterland areas with the major coastal ports.
# SENT:  Oyo, at its territorial zenith in the late 17th to early 18th centuries, extended its influence from western Nigeria to modern-day Togo.In the north, the incessant fighting amongst the Hausa city-states and the decline of the Bornu Empire gave rise to the Fulani people gaining headway into the region.
# SENT:  The territory controlled by the empire included much of modern-day northern and central Nigeria.
# SENT:  By the time of its break-up in 1903 into various European colonies, the Sokoto Caliphate was one of the largest pre-colonial African states.A changing legal imperative (the outlawing of the transatlantic slave trade in 1807) and economic imperative (a desire for political and social stability) led most European powers to support the widespread cultivation of agricultural products, such as the palm, for use in European industry.
# SENT:  Britain's West Africa Squadron sought to intercept the smugglers at sea.
# SENT:  The rescued slaves were taken to Freetown, a colony in West Africa originally established by Lieutenant John Clarkson for the resettlement of slaves freed by Britain in North America after the American Revolutionary War.
# SENT:  In 1864, Samuel Ajayi Crowther became the first African bishop of the Anglican Church.
# SENT:  In 1885, British claims to a West African sphere of influence received recognition from other European nations at the Berlin Conference.
# SENT:  In 1900, the company's territory came under the direct control of the British government and established the Southern Nigeria Protectorate as a British protectorate and part of the British Empire, the foremost world power at the time.
# SENT:  Lugard abolished the caliphate but retained the title sultan as a symbolic position in the newly organized Northern Nigeria Protectorate.
# SENT:  On 1 January 1914, the British formally united the Southern Nigeria Protectorate and the Northern Nigeria Protectorate into the Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria.
# SENT:  Administratively, Nigeria remained divided into the Northern and Southern Protectorates and Lagos Colony.
# SENT:  Following World War II, in response to the growth of Nigerian nationalism and demands for independence, successive constitutions legislated by the British government moved Nigeria toward self-government on a representative and increasingly federal basis.
# SENT:  By the middle of the 20th century, a great wave for independence was sweeping across Africa.Christian missions established Western educational institutions in the protectorates.
# SENT:  Imbalances between north and south were expressed in Nigeria's political life as well.
# SENT:  For instance, northern Nigeria did not outlaw slavery until 1936 whilst in other parts of Nigeria, slavery was abolished soon after colonialism.
# SENT:  Nigeria gained a degree of self-rule in 1954, and full independence from the United Kingdom on 1 October 1960, as the Federation of Nigeria with Abubakar Tafawa Balewa as its prime minister, while retaining the British monarch, Elizabeth II, as nominal head of state and Queen of Nigeria.
# SENT:  At independence, the cultural and political differences were sharp among Nigeria's dominant ethnic groups: the Hausa in the north, Igbo in the east and Yoruba in the west.
# SENT:  The founding government was a coalition of conservative parties: the Northern People's Congress led by Sir Ahmadu Bello, a party dominated by Muslim northerners, and the Igbo and Christian-dominated National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons led by Nnamdi Azikiwe.
# SENT:  Southern Cameroons opted to join the Republic of Cameroon while Northern Cameroons chose to join Nigeria.
# SENT:  This declaration precipitated the Nigerian Civil War, which began as the official Nigerian government side attacked Biafra on 6 July 1967, at Garkem.
# SENT:  Britain and the Soviet Union were the main military backers of the Nigerian government, with Nigeria utilizing air support from Egyptian pilots provided by Gamal Abdel Nasser, while France and Israel aided the Biafrans.
# SENT:  The Congolese government, under President Joseph-Désiré Mobutu, took an early stand on the Biafran secession, voicing strong support for the Nigerian federal government and deploying thousands of troops to fight against the secessionists.
# SENT:  Following the war, Nigeria enjoyed an oil boom in the 1970s, during which the country joined OPEC and received huge oil revenues.
# SENT:  As oil production and revenue rose, the Nigerian government became increasingly dependent on oil revenues and international commodity markets for budgetary and economic concerns.The coup in July 1975, led by Generals Shehu Musa Yar'Adua and Joseph Garba, ousted Gowon, who fled to Britain.
# SENT:  Aware of the danger of alienating northern Nigerians, Obasanjo brought General Shehu Yar'Adua as his replacement and second-in-command as Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters completing the military triumvirate, with Obasanjo as head of state and General Theophilus Danjuma as Chief of Army Staff, the three went on to re-establish control over the military regime and organized the military's transfer of power programme: states creation and national delimitation, local government reforms and the constitutional drafting committee for a new republic.
# SENT:  In 1979, five political parties competed in a series of elections in which Alhaji Shehu Shagari of the National Party of Nigeria (NPN) was elected president.
# SENT:  On October 1, 1979, Shehu Shagari was sworn in as the first President and Commander-in-Chief of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
# SENT:  Obasanjo peacefully transferred power to Shagari, becoming the first head of state in Nigerian history to willingly step down.
# SENT:  The Shagari government became viewed as corrupt by virtually all sectors of Nigerian society.
# SENT:  In 1983, the inspectors of the state-owned Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation began to notice "the slow poisoning of the waters of this country".
# SENT:  It was coordinated by key officers of the Nigerian military and led to the overthrow of the government and the installation of Major General Muhammadu Buhari as head of state.
# SENT:  In 1986, Babangida established the Nigerian Political Bureau which made recommendations for the transition to the Third Nigerian Republic.
# SENT:  In 1989, Babangida started making plans for the transition to the Third Nigerian Republic.
# SENT:  Babangida survived the 1990 Nigerian coup d'état attempt, then postponed a promised return to democracy to 1992.He legalized the formation of political parties and formed the two-party system with the Social Democratic Party and National Republican Convention ahead of the 1992 general elections.
# SENT:  He urged all Nigerians to join either of the parties, which Chief Bola Ige referred to as "two leper hands."
# SENT:  Nigeria made history in April 2006 by becoming the first African country to completely pay off its debt (estimated $30 billion) owed to the Paris Club.
# SENT:  Jonathan's tenure includes the successful fight against Ebola and an economic recovery that made Nigeria the leading economic power in Africa.
# SENT:  Nigeria is located in western Africa on the Gulf of Guinea and has a total area of 923,768 km2 (356,669 sq mi), making it the world's 32nd-largest country.
# SENT:  This is one of the world's largest river deltas and the location of a large area of Central African mangroves.
# SENT:  Lagos is the largest city in Africa, with a population of over 12 million in its urban area.The south of the country in particular is characterised by very strong urbanisation and a relatively large number of cities.
# SENT:  Upon gaining independence in 1960, Nigeria made African unity the centrepiece of its foreign policy.
# SENT:  One exception to the African focus was Nigeria's close relationship developed with Israel throughout the 1960s.
# SENT:  It supported movements against white minority governments in the Southern Africa sub-region.
# SENT:  Nigeria backed the African National Congress by taking a committed tough line about the South African government.
# SENT:  Nigeria was a founding member of the Organisation for African Unity (now the African Union) and has tremendous influence in West Africa and Africa on the whole.
# SENT:  Nigeria founded regional cooperative efforts in West Africa, functioning as the standard-bearer for the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and ECOMOG (especially during the Liberia and Sierra Leone civil wars) - which are economic and military organizations, respectively.
# SENT:  With this Africa-centred stance, Nigeria readily sent troops to the Congo at the behest of the United Nations shortly after independence (and has maintained membership since that time).
# SENT:  Nigeria also supported several Pan-African and pro-self government causes in the 1970s, including garnering support for Angola's MPLA, SWAPO in Namibia, and aiding opposition to the minority governments of Portuguese Mozambique, and Rhodesia.
# SENT:  In late November 2006, it organized an Africa-South America Summit in Abuja to promote what some attendees termed "South-South" linkages on a variety of fronts.
# SENT:  Subsequently, Nigeria's economy is becoming over-reliant on cheap imports to sustain itself, resulting in a clear decline in Nigerian industry under such arrangements.Continuing its Africa-centred foreign policy, Nigeria introduced the idea of a single currency for West Africa known as the Eco under the presumption that it would be led by the naira.
# SENT:  With a force of more than 223,000 active personnel, the Nigerian military is one of the largest uniformed combat services in Africa.
# SENT:  The splinter group ISWAP (Islamic State in West Africa) remains active.
# SENT:  Nigeria's economy is the largest in Africa, the 31st-largest in the world by nominal GDP, and 30th-largest by PPP.
# SENT:  GDP (PPP) per capita is US$9,148 (as of 2022), which is less than South Africa, Egypt or Morocco, but a little more than Ghana or Ivory Coast.
# SENT:  Nigeria is a leader in Africa as a financial market, in pharmaceuticals and in the entertainment industry.
# SENT:  Nigeria has a market of 720,000 cars per year, but less than 20% of these are produced domestically.In 2016 (the last year from which data is available), Nigeria was the leading cement producer south of the Sahara, ahead of South Africa.
# SENT:  In 2021, Nigeria hosts about 60 percent of the pharmaceutical production capacity in Africa, the larger pharmaceutical companies are located in Lagos.
# SENT:  As of January 2022, Nigeria is the host 5 out of the 7 unicorn companies in Africa.
# SENT:  Nigeria has a highly developed financial services sector, with a mix of local and international banks, asset management companies, brokerage houses, insurance companies and brokers, private equity funds and investment banks.Due to Nigeria's location in the centre of Africa, transport plays a major role in the national service sector.
# SENT:  Lagos is regarded as one of the largest technology hubs in Africa with its thriving tech ecosystem.
# SENT:  Lagos has become an important location for African and black cultural identity.Lagos has sandy beaches by the Atlantic Ocean, including Elegushi Beach and Alpha Beach.
# SENT:  Nigeria has the largest road network in West Africa.
# SENT:  Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa and accounts for about 17% of the continent's total population as of 2017; however, exactly how populous is a subject of speculation.Millions of Nigerians have emigrated during times of economic hardship, primarily to Europe, North America and Australia.
# SENT:  Immigrants also include those from other West African or East African nations.
# SENT:  The major languages spoken in Nigeria represent three major families of languages of Africa: the majority are Niger-Congo languages, such as Igbo, Yoruba, Ibibio, Ijaw, Fulfulde, Ogoni, and Edo.
# SENT:  Nigerians are nearly equally divided into Muslims and Christians, with a tiny minority of adherents of traditional African religions and other religions.
# SENT:  As in other parts of Africa where Islam and Christianity are dominant, religious syncretism with the traditional African religions is common.A 2012 report on religion and public life by the Pew Research Center stated that in 2010, 49.3 per cent of Nigeria's population was Christian, 48.8 per cent was Muslim, and 1.9 per cent were followers of indigenous and other religions or unaffiliated.
# SENT:  Since 2021, the Islamic State in West Africa (ISWAP) appears more dominant than Boko Haram.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:30, WORD1_SENTS:43, WORD2_SENTS:20
# WORDPAIR: Korea Korean
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Korea
# SENT:  Korea (Korean: 한국, Hanguk or 조선, Joseon) is a peninsular region in East Asia.
# SENT:  Since 1945, it has been divided at or near the 38th parallel, with North Korea (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) comprising its northern half and South Korea (Republic of Korea) comprising its southern half.
# SENT:  Korea consists of the Korean Peninsula, Jeju Island, and several minor islands near the peninsula.
# SENT:  It is separated from Japan to the east by the Korea Strait and the Sea of Japan (East Sea).
# SENT:  During the first half of the 1st millennium, Korea was divided between three states, Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla, together known as the Three Kingdoms of Korea.
# SENT:  Toward the end of the 1st millennium, Goguryeo was resurrected as Goryeo, which defeated the two other states and unified the Korean Peninsula as a single sovereign state.
# SENT:  Goryeo (also spelled as Koryŏ), whose name developed into the modern exonym "Korea", was a highly cultured state that created the world's first metal movable type in 1234.
# SENT:  During this period, the Korean alphabet was created by Sejong the Great in the 15th century and there was increasing influence of Confucianism.
# SENT:  During the later part of the dynasty, Korea's isolationist policy earned it the Western nickname of the "hermit kingdom".
# SENT:  Korea was removed from Chinese suzerainty following the Qing dynasty's defeat in the First Sino-Japanese War, and Gojong of Korea subsequently proclaimed the Korean Empire in 1897.
# SENT:  The unexpected victory of Japan in the Russo-Japanese War spelled the end of Russian imperial ambitions in Korea, and Japan was left with no other rivals in the region.
# SENT:  The Korean Empire subsequently became a protectorate of Japan on 17 November 1905, and was later annexed by Japan on 22 August 1910.
# SENT:  Japan relinquished control over Korea after formally surrendering to the Allies on 2 September 1945, in the aftermath of World War II.
# SENT:  The Soviet Union and the United States had agreed to partition Korea along the 38th parallel, with the Soviets occupying the north and the Americans occupying the south.
# SENT:  These circumstances became the basis for the division of Korea by the two superpowers with two different ideologies, exacerbated by their inability to agree on the terms of Korean independence.
# SENT:  The Communist-inspired government in the North received backing from the Soviet Union in opposition to the pro-Western government in the South, leading to Korea's division into two sovereign states in 1948: North Korea, and South Korea.
# SENT:  Tensions between the two resulted in the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950.
# SENT:  A breakthrough in the peace process came on 27 April 2018, when North Korea and South Korea signed the Panmunjom Declaration on ending the conflict and reunifying Korea.
# SENT:  "Korea" is the modern spelling of "Corea", a name attested in English as early as 1614.
# SENT:  Korea was transliterated as Cauli in The Travels of Marco Polo, of the Chinese 高麗 (MC: Kawlej, mod.
# SENT:  This was the Hanja for the Korean kingdom of Goryeo (Korean: 고려; MR: Koryŏ), which ruled most of the Korean peninsula during Marco Polo's time.
# SENT:  Korea's introduction to the West resulted from trade and contact with merchants from Arabic lands, with some records dating back as far as the 9th century.
# SENT:  Goryeo's name was a continuation of Goguryeo (Koguryŏ) the northernmost of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, which was officially known as Goryeo beginning in the 5th century.
# SENT:  With expanding British and American trade following the opening of Korea in the late 19th century, the spelling "Korea" appeared and gradually grew in popularity; its use in transcribing East Asian languages avoids the issues caused by the separate hard and soft Cs existing in English vocabulary derived from the Romance languages.
# SENT:  The name Korea is now commonly used in English contexts by both North and South Korea.
# SENT:  In South Korea, Korea as a whole is referred to as Hanguk (한국, [haːnɡuk], lit.
# SENT:  The name references Samhan, referring to the Three Kingdoms of Korea, not the ancient confederacies in the southern Korean Peninsula.
# SENT:  Although written in Hanja as 韓, 幹, or 刊, this Han has no relation to the Chinese place names or peoples who used those characters but was a phonetic transcription (OC: *Gar, MC: Han or Gan) of a native Korean word that seems to have had the meaning "big" or "great", particularly in reference to leaders.
# SENT:  In North Korea, Korea as a whole is referred to as Joseon (조선, [tɕosʰʌn], lit.
# SENT:  Joseon is the modern Korean pronunciation of the Hanja 朝鮮, which is also the basis of the word for Korea as a whole in Japan (朝鮮, Chōsen), China (朝鲜, Cháoxiǎn), and Vietnam (Triều Tiên).
# SENT:  "Great Joseon" was the name of the kingdom ruled by the Joseon dynasty from 1393 until their declaration of the short-lived Great Korean Empire in 1897.
# SENT:  King Taejo had named them for the earlier Gojoseon (고조선), who ruled northern Korea from its legendary prehistory until their conquest in 108 BCE by China's Han Empire.
# SENT:  It is unclear whether Joseon was a transcription of a native Korean name (OC *T[r]awser, MC Trjewsjen) or a partial translation into Chinese of the Korean capital Asadal (아사달), whose meaning has been reconstructed as "Morning Land" or "Mountain".
# SENT:  The Korean Academy claimed ancient hominid fossils originating from about 100,000 BCE in the lava at a stone city site in Korea.
# SENT:  The best preserved Korean pottery goes back to the paleolithic times around 10,000 BCE and the Neolithic period begins around 6000 BCE.
# SENT:  Beginning around 300 BC, the Japonic-speaking Yayoi people from the Korean Peninsula entered the Japanese islands and displaced or intermingled with the original Jōmon inhabitants.
# SENT:  The linguistic homeland of Proto-Koreans is located somewhere in Southern Siberia/Manchuria, such the Liao river area or the Amur region.
# SENT:  Proto-Koreans arrived in the southern part of the Korean Peninsula at around 300 BC, replacing and assimilating Japonic-speakers and likely causing the Yayoi migration.
# SENT:  According to Korean legend, Dangun, a descendant of Heaven, established Gojoseon in 2333 BCE.
# SENT:  In 108 BCE, the Han dynasty defeated Gojoseon and installed four commanderies in the northern Korean peninsula.
# SENT:  This time period saw numerous states spring up from the former territories of Gojoseon, which encompassed northern Korea and southern Manchuria.
# SENT:  With the fall of Gojoseon, southern Korea entered the Samhan period.
# SENT:  Located in the southern part of Korea, Samhan referred to the three confederacies of Mahan, Jinhan, and Byeonhan.
# SENT:  The Three Kingdoms of Korea consisted of Goguryeo, Silla, and Baekje.
# SENT:  Silla and Baekje controlled the southern half of the Korean Peninsula, maintaining the former Samhan territories, while Goguryeo controlled the northern half of the Korean Peninsula, Manchuria and the Liaodong Peninsula, uniting Buyeo, Okjeo, Dongye, and other states in the former Gojoseon territories.Goguryeo was a highly militaristic state; it was a powerful empire and one of the great powers in East Asia, reaching its zenith in the 5th century when its territories expanded to encompass most of Manchuria to the north, parts of Inner Mongolia to the west, parts of Russia to the east, and the Seoul region to the south.
# SENT:  Goguryeo experienced a golden age under Gwanggaeto the Great and his son Jangsu, who both subdued Baekje and Silla during their times, achieving a brief unification of the Three Kingdoms of Korea and becoming the most dominant power on the Korean Peninsula.
# SENT:  In addition to contesting for control of the Korean Peninsula, Goguryeo had many military conflicts with various Chinese dynasties, most notably the Goguryeo–Sui War, in which Goguryeo defeated a huge force said to number over a million men.
# SENT:  After the death of Tang Taizong, his son Emperor Tang Gaozong allied with the Korean kingdom of Silla and invaded Goguryeo again, but was unable to overcome Goguryeo's stalwart defences and was defeated in 662.
# SENT:  After the collapse of Goguryeo, Tang and Silla ended their alliance and fought over control of the Korean Peninsula.
# SENT:  Silla succeeded in gaining control over most of the Korean Peninsula, while Tang gained control over Goguryeo's northern territories.
# SENT:  However, 30 years after the fall of Goguryeo, a Goguryeo general by the name of Dae Joyeong founded the Korean-Mohe state of Balhae and successfully expelled the Tang presence from much of the former Goguryeo territories.
# SENT:  The southwestern Korean kingdom of Baekje was founded around modern-day Seoul by a Goguryeo prince, a son of the founder of Goguryeo.
# SENT:  Baekje absorbed all of the Mahan states and subjugated most of the western Korean peninsula (including the modern provinces of Gyeonggi, Chungcheong, and Jeolla, as well as parts of Hwanghae and Gangwon) to a centralised government; during the expansion of its territory, Baekje acquired Chinese culture and technology through maritime contacts with the Southern Dynasties.
# SENT:  Baekje was once a great military power on the Korean Peninsula, most notably in the 4th century during the rule of Geunchogo when its influence extended across the sea to Liaoxi and Shandong in China, taking advantage of the weakened state of Former Qin, and Kyushu in the Japanese archipelago; however, Baekje was critically defeated by Gwanggaeto the Great and declined.
# SENT:  Silla was the smallest and weakest of the three, but it used cunning diplomatic means to make opportunistic pacts and alliances with the more powerful Korean kingdoms, and eventually Tang China, to its great advantage.
# SENT:  Beginning in the 6th century, Silla's power gradually extended across the Korean Peninsula.
# SENT:  After conquering Baekje and Goguryeo, Silla repulsed Tang China from the Korean peninsula in 676.
# SENT:  Even though Silla unified most of the Korean Peninsula, most of the Goguryeo territories to the north of the Korean Peninsula were ruled by Balhae.
# SENT:  At its height, Balhae's territories extended from southern Manchuria down to the northern Korean peninsula.
# SENT:  Buddhism flourished during this time, and many Korean Buddhists gained great fame among Chinese Buddhists and contributed to Chinese Buddhism, including: Woncheuk, Wonhyo, Uisang, Musang, and Kim Gyo-gak, a Silla prince whose influence made Mount Jiuhua one of the Four Sacred Mountains of Chinese Buddhism.Later Silla fell apart in the late 9th century, giving way to the tumultuous Later Three Kingdoms period (892–935), and Balhae was destroyed by the Khitans in 926.
# SENT:  Goryeo's land was at first what is now South Korea and about 1/3 of North Korea, but later on managed to recover most of the Korean peninsula.
# SENT:  The publication of the Tripitaka Koreana onto more than 80,000 wooden blocks and the invention of the world's first metal movable type in the 13th century attest to Goryeo's cultural achievements.
# SENT:  After defeating the Khitan Empire, which was the most powerful empire of its time, Goryeo experienced a golden age that lasted a century, during which the Tripitaka Koreana was completed, and there were great developments in printing and publishing, promoting learning and dispersing knowledge on philosophy, literature, religion, and science; by 1100, there were 12 universities that produced famous scholars and scientists.Goryeo was invaded by the Mongols in seven major campaigns from the 1230s until the 1270s, but was never conquered.
# SENT:  Exhausted after decades of fighting, Goryeo sent its crown prince to the Yuan capital to swear allegiance to the Mongols; Kublai Khan accepted, and married one of his daughters to the Korean crown prince, and the dynastic line of Goryeo continued to survive under the overlordship of the Mongol Yuan dynasty as a semi-autonomous vassal state and compulsory ally.
# SENT:  The two nations became intertwined for 80 years as all subsequent Korean kings married Mongol princesses, and the last empress of the Yuan dynasty was a Korean princess.In the 1350s, King Gongmin was free at last to reform the Goryeo government when the Yuan dynasty began to crumble.
# SENT:  Most notable among them was Sejong the Great (r. 1418–50), who personally created and promulgated Hangul, the Korean alphabet.
# SENT:  Joseon implemented a class system that consisted of yangban the noble class, jungin the middle class, yangin the common class, and cheonin the lowest class, which included occupations such as butchers, tanners, shamans, entertainers, and nobi, the equivalent of slaves, bondservants, or serfs.In 1592 and again in 1597, the Japanese invaded Korea; the Korean military at the time was unprepared and untrained, due to two centuries of peace on the Korean Peninsula.
# SENT:  Toyotomi Hideyoshi intended to conquer China and India through the Korean Peninsula, but was defeated by strong resistance from the Righteous Army, the naval superiority of Admiral Yi Sun-sin and his turtle ships, and assistance from Wanli Emperor of Ming China.
# SENT:  However, Joseon experienced great destruction, including a tremendous loss of cultural sites such as temples and palaces to Japanese pillaging, and the Japanese brought back to Japan an estimated 100,000–200,000 noses cut from Korean victims.
# SENT:  Beginning in 1871, Japan began to exert more influence in Korea, forcing it out of China's traditional sphere of influence.
# SENT:  That same year, Empress Myeongseong of Korea was assassinated by Japanese agents.In 1897, the Joseon dynasty proclaimed the Korean Empire (1897–1910).
# SENT:  Korean resistance to the brutal Japanese occupation was manifested in the nonviolent March 1st Movement of 1919, during which 7,000 demonstrators were killed by Japanese police and military.
# SENT:  The Korean liberation movement also spread to neighbouring Manchuria and Siberia.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:50, WORD1_SENTS:23, WORD2_SENTS:0
# WORDPAIR: Jharkhand Ranchi
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ranchi
# SENT:  Ranching is also a method used to raise less common livestock such as horses, elk, American bison, ostrich, emu, and alpaca.Ranches generally consist of large areas, but may be of nearly any size.
# SENT:  Ranching is part of the iconography of the "Wild West" as seen in Western movies and rodeos.
# SENT:  Ranching and the cowboy tradition originated in Spain, out of the necessity to handle large herds of grazing animals on dry land from horseback.
# SENT:  Ranching in Hawaii developed independently of that in the continental United States.
# SENT:  In Argentina and Uruguay, ranches are known as estancias and in Brazil, they are called fazendas.
# SENT:  This Was Cattle Ranching: Yesterday and Today.
# SENT:  The Canadian Museum of Civilization - Native Ranching and Rodeo Life on the Plains and Plateau 
# SENT:  The Handbook of Texas Online: Ranching
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ranchi_district
# SENT:  Ranchi district  is the most populous district of Jharkhand state in eastern India.
# SENT:  Ranchi, the capital of Jharkhand, is the district headquarters.
# SENT:  After the decline of the Guptas, Phani Mukut Rai established the Nagvanshi dynasty c. 1000 CE, which ruled Ranchi district and part of Chota Nagpur Plateau as a sovereign king for almost next 1000 years.
# SENT:  Ranchi has a humid subtropical climate.
# SENT:  Its climate is the primary reason why Ranchi was once the summer capital of the undivided State of Bihar.
# SENT:  Ranchi used to be a preferable hill station in the past.
# SENT:  Ranchi is located at 23°21′N 85°20′E.
# SENT:  [5] The total area covered by the Ranchi municipal area is 175.12 square kilometres and the average elevation of the city is 651 m above sea level.
# SENT:  Ranchi is located on the southern part of the Chota Nagpur plateau which forms the eastern edge of the Deccan plateau.
# SENT:  Ranchi is referred to as the "City of Waterfalls", due to the presence of numerous large and small falls of around the close vicinity of the city.
# SENT:  Ranchi has a hilly topography and its combination with dense tropical forests ensures that it enjoys a comparatively moderate climate compared to the rest of the state.
# SENT:  In 2006 the Indian government named Ranchi one of the country's 250 most backward districts (out of a total of 640).
# SENT:  It is one of the 23 districts in Jharkhand currently receiving funds from the Backward Regions Grant Fund Programme (BRGF).
# SENT:  In the aspirational districts, Ranchi have improved.
# SENT:  Presently, Ranchi district is divided into 2 sub-divisions and 14 administrative blocks.
# SENT:  On 12 September 2007, Khunti district was created by carving Khunti subdivision and its 6 blocks out of Ranchi district.
# SENT:  Ranchi sub-division is further divided into 11 blocks: Angara, Burmu, Bero, Chanho, Kanke, Lapung, Mandar, Namkum, Ormanjhi, Ratu and Silli.
# SENT:  Bundu sub-division comprises 3 blocks: Bundu, Sonahatu, and Tamar, The district has 7 Assembly constituencies, namely, Tamar (ST), Silli, Khijri (ST), Ranchi, Hatia, Kanke (SC), and Mandar (ST).
# SENT:  Silli, Khijri, Ranchi, Hatia and Kanke are part of Ranchi Lok Sabha constituency.
# SENT:  Ranchi district boasts of many premier institutes in the field of higher education.
# SENT:  This may be a reason that Ranchi has an average literacy rate of 77.13%(census 2011), higher than the national average of 74.04%: male literacy is 85.63%, and female literacy is 68.2%.Some of the popular schools for education in ranchi are Loyola Convent School, Delhi Public School, Jawahar Vidya Mandir, Kairali School, St.Xavier's School, St. Thomas School and Bishop Westcott.
# SENT:  Ranchi University, presently comprising 35 constituent colleges and 29 affiliated colleges, was established in 1960.
# SENT:  One of its constituent college, St. Xavier's College at Ranchi was established in 1944.
# SENT:  Birla Institute of Technology at Mesra, Ranchi was established in 1955.
# SENT:  Birsa Agricultural University at Ranchi was established in 1981.
# SENT:  IIM Ranchi, the eighth Indian Institute of Management was established at Ranchi in 2010.
# SENT:  National University of Study and Research in Law, Ranchi was established by a legislative act of the Government of Jharkhand as the fourteenth national law university of India .
# SENT:  Xavier Institute of Social Service (XISS), Ranchi started in the year of 1955 with an intention to educate young graduates in the field of social work and management programs.
# SENT:  This department stated as the extension department of St Xavier's college of Ranchi.
# SENT:  The isolated campus of the Xavier Institute of Social Service is located in the Purulia Road, Ranchi.
# SENT:  Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS), a medical institute of Ranchi University in Ranchi, was established in 2002 by upgrading the then Rajendra Medical College Hospital (RMCH) which was established in 1960.
# SENT:  The Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi is an institute offering higher level study in the domain of medical education.
# SENT:  The Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi is jointly administered by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Directorate General of Health Services.
# SENT:  The Central Institute of Psychiatry in Ranchi accepts psychiatric patients from all over India and also from Bhutan and Nepal.
# SENT:  The Central Institute of Psychiatry of Ranchi teaches higher level medical courses in Clinical Psychology, Psychiatry, Psychiatric Nursing and Psychiatric Social Work.
# SENT:  The British established this hospital on 17 May 1918 with the name of Ranchi European Lunatic Asylum.
# SENT:  The Central University of Jharkhand is a Central University, established by an act of Indian Parliament (Act no.
# SENT:  According to the 2011 census Ranchi district has a population of 2,914,253, roughly equal to the nation of Jamaica or the US state of Arkansas.
# SENT:  Ranchi has a sex ratio of 950 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 77.13%.Hindus are 56.32%, while other religions (mainly Sarna) are 23.25%.
# SENT:  Ranchi district consists of 18 Blocks.
# SENT:  Official government website
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jharkhand
# SENT:  Jharkhand (; Hindi: [d͡ʒʱɑːɾkʰəɳɖ]; lit.
# SENT:  The city of Ranchi is its capital and Dumka its sub-capital.
# SENT:  Jharkhand suffers from what is sometimes termed a resource curse: it accounts for more than 40% of the mineral resources of India, but 39.1% of its population is below the poverty line and 19.6% of children under five years of age are malnourished.
# SENT:  Jharkhand is primarily rural, with about 24% of its population living in cities.
# SENT:  Thus "Jharkhand" means forest land.In the ancient period, in the  Mahabharata, the region was referred as Kark Khand due to location near Kark Rekha i.e.
# SENT:  During the Medieval period, the region was known as Jharkhand.
# SENT:  According to Bhavishya Purana (1200 CE), Jharkhand was one of the seven Pundra desa.
# SENT:  Forest land from Baidhnath dham to Puri was known as Jharkhand.
# SENT:  In Akbarnama, from Panchet in the east to Ratanpur to west, Rohtasgarh to the north and the frontier of Odisha to the south was known as Jharkhand.
# SENT:  During the age of Mahajanpadas around 500 BCE, Jharkhand state was a part of Magadha and Anga.
# SENT:  Thakur Ani Nath Shahdeo built Jagannath temple of Ranchi in 1691.
# SENT:  In 1955, the Jharkhand Party, led by Jaipal Singh Munda, submitted a memorandum to States Reorganization Commission for a separate Jharkhand state comprising the tribal area of South Bihar, but it was rejected because there were many languages, no link language in the region, tribal were in the minority, Hindustani was the majority language and adverse effect on economy of Bihar.Later Sadan people, the native various caste/non-tribal groups, also joined the movement for a separate state.
# SENT:  In 1972, Binod Bihari Mahato, Shibu Soren and A. K. Roy founded Jharkhand Mukti Morcha.
# SENT:  Nirmal Mahto founded All Jharkhand Students Union.
# SENT:  They led the movement for a separate state of Jharkhand.
# SENT:  The Jharkhand coordination committee (JCC), consisting of Ram Dayal Munda, B. P. Keshri, Binod Bihari Mahato, Santosh Rana and Suraj Singh Besra started a new initiative and tried to coordinate between different parties.
# SENT:  Keshri sent a memorandum to form Jharkhand state in 1988.
# SENT:  Jharkhand co-ordination committee was then led by Congress General Secretary Ram Ratan Ram, who urged Rajiv Gandhi to pay attention to the issue at hand.
# SENT:  They organised several rallies to form a separate state.Central government formed a committee on the Jharkhand matter in 1989.
# SENT:  The All Jharkhand Students Union introduced elements of violence in the movement and called for a boycott of election while Jharkhand Mukti Morcha opposed this.
# SENT:  The Jharkhand Area Autonomous Council bill passed in Bihar legislative assembly in December 1994.
# SENT:  The Jharkhand Area Autonomous Council were given responsibility for forty areas including agriculture, rural health, public work, public health and minerals.
# SENT:  In 1998, the Union government decided to send the bill concerning the formation of Jharkhand state to Bihar Legislative Assembly to which Lalu Prasad Yadav had said that the state would be divided over his dead body.
# SENT:  A total of 16 political parties including the Bharatiya Janata Party, Jharkhand Mukti Morcha, All Jharkhand Students Union and Congress came in one platform and formed the 'All Party Separate State Formation Committee' to start the movement.
# SENT:  The voting on Jharkhand Act was to be done on 21 September 1998 in Bihar legislation.
# SENT:  On that day the committee, under the leadership of Shahdeo called for Jharkhand Bandh and organised a protest march.
# SENT:  Later the name of the state was changed from Vanachal to Jharkhand.
# SENT:  The dynamics of resources and the politics of development still influence the socio-economic structures in Jharkhand, which was carved out of the relatively underdeveloped southern part of Bihar.
# SENT:  Jharkhand has 24 districts, 260 blocks, and 32,620 villages out of which only 45% have access to electricity while only 8,484 are connected by roads.
# SENT:  Jharkhand is the leading producer of mineral wealth in the country after Chhattisgarh state, endowed as it is with a vast variety of minerals like iron ore, coal, copper ore, mica, bauxite, graphite, limestone, and uranium.
# SENT:  Jharkhand is also known for its vast forest resources.
# SENT:  Jharkhand has been at the centre of the Naxalite-Maoist insurgency.
# SENT:  Since the uprising of the Naxalites in 1967, 6,000 people have been killed in fighting between the Naxalites and counter-insurgency operations by the police, and its paramilitary groups such as the Salwa Judum.Despite having a presence in almost 7.80% of India's geographical area (home to 5.50% of India's population), the state of Jharkhand is part of the "Red Corridor" comprising 92,000 square kilometres, where the highest concentration of the groups estimated 20,000 combatants fight.
# SENT:  His widow, Suman Mahato, the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha candidate, won the Jamshedpur Lok Sabha by-election in September 2007 and served in parliament until 2009.
# SENT:  Jharkhand is located in the eastern part of India and is enclosed by West Bengal to the eastern side, Chhattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh to the western side, Bihar to the northern part and Odisha to the southern part.
# SENT:  Jharkhand envelops a geographical area of 7,970,000 hectare.
# SENT:  Much of Jharkhand lies on the Chota Nagpur Plateau.
# SENT:  The higher watersheds of these rivers stretch out within the Jharkhand state.
# SENT:  Much of the Jharkhand state is still enclosed by forest.
# SENT:  Climate of Jharkhand varies from Humid subtropical in the north to tropical wet and dry in the south-east.
# SENT:  The temperatures in Ranchi in December usually vary from 10–24 °C (50–75 °F).
# SENT:  The Parasnath Hill is situated in Giridih district of Jharkhand.
# SENT:  Rajmahal Hills: These hills are located in Sahibganj and Godda districts of Eastern part of Jharkhand.
# SENT:  Trikut: Trikut Hill is located ten kilometres away from Deoghar and lies on the way to Dumka in Jharkhand.
# PAGE:  https://hi.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E0%A4%B0%E0%A4%BE%E0%A4%81%E0%A4%9A%E0%A5%80_%E0%A4%9C%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%B2%E0%A4%BE
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Ranchi
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_neighbourhoods_of_Ranchi
# SENT:  Ranchi pronunciation  is the capital city of Jharkhand state, India.
# SENT:  Ranchi was the centre of the Jharkhand movement for a separate state for the tribal regions of South Bihar.
# SENT:  Jharkhand was formed on 15 November 2000 by carving out the districts of Chota Nagpur and Santhal Parganas divisions of Bihar.
# SENT:  It is not very far from Rajrappa, another seminal place in the state of Jharkhand.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:5, WORD1_SENTS:45, WORD2_SENTS:47
# WORDPAIR: Mexico Mexican
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexico
# SENT:  Mexico (Spanish: México), officially the United Mexican States, is a country in the southern portion of North America.
# SENT:  It is bordered to the north by the United States; to the south and west by the Pacific Ocean; to the southeast by Guatemala, Belize, and the Caribbean Sea; and to the east by the Gulf of Mexico.
# SENT:  Mexico covers 1,972,550 square kilometers (761,610 sq mi), making it the world's 13th-largest country by area; with approximately 126,014,024 inhabitants, it is the 10th-most-populous country and has the most Spanish-speakers.
# SENT:  Mexico is organized as a federal republic comprising 31 states and Mexico City, its capital.
# SENT:  Other major urban areas include Monterrey, Guadalajara, Puebla, Toluca, Tijuana, Ciudad Juárez, and León.Human presence in Pre-Columbian Mexico goes back to 8,000 BCE and it went to become one of the world's six cradles of civilization.
# SENT:  In 1521, the Spanish Empire and its indigenous allies conquered the Aztec Empire from its capital Tenochtitlan (now Mexico City), establishing the colony of New Spain.
# SENT:  Mexico's early history as an independent nation state was marked by political and socioeconomic upheaval, both domestically and in foreign affairs.
# SENT:  Then two invasions by foreign powers took place: first, by the United States as a consequence of the Texas Revolt by American settlers, which led to the Mexican–American War and huge territorial losses in 1848.
# SENT:  The last decades of the 19th century were dominated by the dictatorship of Porfirio Díaz, who sought to modernize Mexico and restore order.
# SENT:  However, the Porfiriato era led to great social unrest and ended with the outbreak in 1910 of the decade-long Mexican Revolution (civil war).
# SENT:  This conflict had profound changes in Mexican society, including the proclamation of the 1917 Constitution, which remains in effect to this day.
# SENT:  The PRI in turn governed Mexico for the next 70 years, first under a set of paternalistic developmental policies of considerable economic success.
# SENT:  During World War II Mexico also played an important role for the Allied war effort.
# SENT:  Mexico has the world's 15th-largest economy by nominal GDP and the 11th-largest by PPP, with the United States being its largest economic partner.
# SENT:  As a newly industrialized and developing country ranking 86th, high in the Human Development Index, its large economy and population, cultural influence, and steady democratization make Mexico a regional and middle power which is also identified as an emerging power by several analysts.
# SENT:  Mexico ranks first in the Americas and seventh in the world for the number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
# SENT:  Mexico's rich cultural and biological heritage, as well as varied climate and geography, makes it a major tourist destination: as of 2018, it was the sixth most-visited country in the world, with 39 million international arrivals.
# SENT:  Mexico is a member of United Nations, the G20, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, the Organization of American States, Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, and the Organization of Ibero-American States.
# SENT:  Mēxihco is the Nahuatl term for the heartland of the Aztec Empire, namely the Valley of Mexico and surrounding territories, with its people being known as the Mexica.
# SENT:  In the colonial era (1521–1821) Mexico was called New Spain.
# SENT:  In the eighteenth century, this central region became the Intendency of Mexico, during the reorganization of the empire, the Bourbon Reforms.
# SENT:  After New Spain achieved independence from the Spanish Empire in 1821 and became a sovereign state, the territory came to be known as the State of Mexico, with the new country being named after its capital: Mexico City, which itself was founded in 1524 on the site of the ancient Mexica capital of Mexico-Tenochtitlan.
# SENT:  On two occasions (1821–1823 and 1863–1867), the country was known as Imperio Mexicano (Mexican Empire).
# SENT:  All three federal constitutions (1824, 1857 and 1917, the current constitution) used the name Estados Unidos Mexicanos—or the variant Estados-Unidos Mexicanos, all of which have been translated as "United Mexican States".
# SENT:  The phrase República Mexicana, "Mexican Republic", was used in the 1836 Constitutional Laws.
# SENT:  The prehistory of Mexico stretches back millennia.
# SENT:  The earliest human artifacts in Mexico are chips of stone tools found near campfire remains in the Valley of Mexico and radiocarbon-dated to circa 10,000 years ago.
# SENT:  Mexico is the site of the domestication of maize, tomato, and beans, which produced an agricultural surplus.
# SENT:  In the subsequent formative eras, maize cultivation and cultural traits such as a mythological and religious complex, and a vigesimal (base 20) numeric system, were diffused from the Mexican cultures to the rest of the Mesoamerican culture area.
# SENT:  The most powerful rulers had religious and political power, organizing the construction of large ceremonial centers.The earliest complex civilization in Mexico was the Olmec culture, which flourished on the Gulf Coast from around 1500 BCE.
# SENT:  Olmec cultural traits diffused through Mexico into other formative-era cultures in Chiapas, Oaxaca and the Valley of Mexico.
# SENT:  The tradition of writing was important after the Spanish conquest in 1521, with indigenous scribes learning to write their languages in alphabetic letters, while also continuing to create pictorial texts.In Central Mexico, the height of the classic period saw the ascendancy of Teotihuacán, which formed a military and commercial empire whose political influence stretched south into the Maya area as well as north.
# SENT:  After the collapse of Teotihuacán around 600 AD, competition ensued between several important political centers in central Mexico such as Xochicalco and Cholula.
# SENT:  At this time, during the Epi-Classic, Nahua peoples began moving south into Mesoamerica from the North, and became politically and culturally dominant in central Mexico, as they displaced speakers of Oto-Manguean languages.
# SENT:  1000–1519 CE), Central Mexico was dominated by the Toltec culture, Oaxaca by the Mixtec, and the lowland Maya area had important centers at Chichén Itzá and Mayapán.
# SENT:  Toward the end of the post-Classic period, the Mexica established dominance, establishing a political and economic empire based in the city of Tenochtitlan (modern Mexico City), extending from central Mexico to the border with Guatemala.
# SENT:  In 1843, with the publication of the work of William H. Prescott, it was adopted by most of the world, including 19th-century Mexican scholars who considered it a way to distinguish present-day Mexicans from pre-conquest Mexicans.
# SENT:  The Aztec of Central Mexico built a tributary empire covering most of central Mexico.
# SENT:  Other Mexican indigenous cultures were conquered and gradually subjected to Spanish colonial rule.Since the colonial era and through to the twenty-first century, the indigenous roots of Mexican history and culture are essential to Mexican identity.
# SENT:  The National Museum of Anthrology in Mexico City is the showcase of the nation's prehispanic glories.
# SENT:  Mexican Nobel laureate Octavio Paz said of the museum that the "exaltation and glorification of Mexico-Tenochtitlan transforms the Museum of Anthropology into a temple."
# SENT:  Mexico pursued international recognition of its prehispanic heritage, and has a large number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the largest in the hemisphere.
# SENT:  Although the Spanish Empire had established colonies in the Caribbean starting in 1493, only in the second decade of the sixteenth century did they begin exploring the east coast of Mexico.
# SENT:  The Spanish first learned of Mexico during the Juan de Grijalva expedition of 1518.
# SENT:  The 1521 capture of Tenochtitlan and immediate founding of the Spanish capital Mexico City on its ruins was the beginning of a 300-year-long colonial era during which Mexico was known as Nueva España (New Spain).
# SENT:  Two factors made Mexico a jewel in the Spanish Empire: the existence of large, hierarchically organized Mesoamerican populations that rendered tribute and performed obligatory labor and the discovery of vast silver deposits in northern Mexico.
# SENT:  In 1524, King Charles I created the Council of the Indies based in Spain to oversee State power its overseas territories; in New Spain the crown established a high court in Mexico City, the Real Audiencia, and then in 1535 created the Viceroyalty of New Spain.
# SENT:  In the religious sphere, the diocese of Mexico was created in 1530 and elevated to the Archdiocese of Mexico in 1546, with the archbishop as the head of the ecclesiastical hierarchy, overseeing Roman Catholic clergy.
# SENT:  The Catholic faith the only one permitted, with non-Catholics (Jews and Protestants) and Catholics (excluding Indians) holding unorthodox views being subject to the Mexican Inquisition, established in 1571.In the first half-century of Spanish rule, a network of Spanish cities was created, sometimes on pre-Columbian sites where there were dense indigenous populations.
# SENT:  The capital Mexico City was and remains the premier city, but other cities founded in the sixteenth century remain important, including Puebla, Guadalajara, Guanajuato, Zacatecas, Oaxaca, and the port of Veracruz.
# SENT:  When deposits of silver were discovered in sparsely populated northern Mexico, far from the dense populations of central Mexico, the Spanish secured the region against fiercely resistant indigenous Chichimecas.
# SENT:  The Viceroyalty at its greatest extent included the territories of modern Mexico, Central America as far south as Costa Rica, and the western United States.
# SENT:  The Viceregal capital Mexico City also administrated the Spanish West Indies (the Caribbean), the Spanish East Indies (that is, the Philippines), and Spanish Florida.
# SENT:  Mexican silver pesos became the first globally used currency.
# SENT:  As a result of its trade links with Asia, the rest of the Americas, Africa and Europe and the profound effect of New World silver, central Mexico was one of the first regions to be incorporated into a globalized economy.
# SENT:  Being at the crossroads of trade, people and cultures, Mexico City has been called the "first world city".
# SENT:  The Camino Real de Tierra Adentro connected Mexico City with the interior of New Spain.
# SENT:  The population of Mexico was overwhelmingly indigenous and rural during the entire colonial period and beyond, despite the massive decrease in their numbers due to epidemic diseases.
# SENT:  During the three hundred years of the colonial era, Mexico received between 400,000 and 500,000 Europeans, between 200,000 and 250,000 African slaves.
# SENT:  Independence-era Mexico eliminated the legal basis for the hierarchical system of racial classification, although the racial/ethnic labels continued to be used.
# SENT:  This discrimination between the two became a sparking point of discontent for white elites in the colony.The Marian apparition of the Virgin of Guadalupe said to have appeared to the indigenous Juan Diego in 1531 gave impetus to the evangelization of central Mexico.
# SENT:  The Virgin of Guadalupe became a symbol for American-born Spaniards' (criollos) patriotism, seeking in her a Mexican source of pride, distinct from Spain.
# SENT:  In subsequent years, the insurgency was a stalemate, but in 1820 when Spanish liberals seized power in Spain, and Mexican conservatives worried about the imposition of liberal principles overseas, including curtailment of the power of the Catholic Church.
# SENT:  The flag of the newly formed Army of the Three Guarantees has evolved into today's Mexican flag.
# SENT:  On 24 August 1821 in incoming Viceroy and Iturbide signed the Treaty of Córdoba and the Declaration of Independence of the Mexican Empire", which recognized the independence of Mexico under the terms of the Plan of Iguala.
# SENT:  The first 35 years after Mexico's independence were marked by political instability and the changing of the Mexican state from a transient monarchy to a fragile federated republic.
# SENT:  The emperor's rule was short (1822–23) and he was overthrown by army officers in the Plan of Casa Mata.After the forced abdication of the monarch, the First Mexican Republic was established.
# SENT:  Wanting to stabilize and develop the frontier, the Mexican government encouraged Anglo-American immigration into present-day Texas, a region that bordered that United States.
# SENT:  Some brought their black slaves, which after 1829 was contrary to Mexican law.
# SENT:  : 129–137  The largest blow to Mexico was the U.S. invasion of Mexico in 1846 in the Mexican–American War.
# SENT:  Mexican conservatives asked Emperor Napoleon III to place a European monarch as head of state in Mexico.
# SENT:  The French Army defeated the Mexican Army and placed Maximilian Hapsburg on the newly established throne of Mexico, supported by Mexican Conservatives and propped up by the French Army.
# SENT:  The Liberal republic under Benito Juárez was basically a government in internal exile, but with the end of the Civil War in the U.S. in April 1865, that government began aiding the Mexican Republic.
# SENT:  Republican forces captured him and he was executed in Querétaro, along with two Conservative Mexican generals.
# SENT:  The Mexican Army that had its roots in the colonial royal army and then the army of the early republic was destroyed.
# SENT:  The Mexican government ordered a survey of land with the aim of selling it for development.
# SENT:  Changes in Mexican law allowed for private enterprises to own the subsoil rights of land, rather than continuing the colonial law that gave all subsoil rights to the State.
# SENT:  The Mexican Revolution starting in 1910 saw a decade of civil war, the "wind that swept Mexico."
# SENT:  The Mexican Revolution was a decade-long transformational conflict in Mexico, with consequences to this day.
# SENT:  The expeditionary forces withdrew as the U.S. entered World War I. Germany attempted to get Mexico to side with it, sending a coded telegram in 1917 to incite war between the U.S. and Mexico, with Mexico to regain the territory it lost in the Mexican-American War.
# SENT:  The post-revolutionary project of the Mexican government sought to bring order to the country, end military intervention in politics, and create organizations of interest groups.
# SENT:  Workers, peasants, urban office workers, and even the army for a short period were incorporated as sectors of the single party that dominated Mexican politics from its founding in 1929.
# SENT:  This included the Mexican oil expropriation in March 1938, which nationalized the U.S. and Anglo-Dutch oil company known as the Mexican Eagle Petroleum Company.
# SENT:  This movement would result in the creation of the state-owned Mexican oil company Pemex.
# SENT:  From 1946 the election of Miguel Alemán, the first civilian president in the post-revolutionary period, Mexico embarked on an aggressive program of economic development, known as the Mexican miracle, which was characterized by industrialization, urbanization, and the increase of inequality in Mexico between urban and rural areas.
# SENT:  PRI rule became increasingly authoritarian and at times oppressive in what is now referred to as the Mexican Dirty War.Luis Echeverría, Minister of the Interior under Díaz Ordaz, carrying out the repression during the Olympics, was elected president in 1970.
# SENT:  His government had to contend with mistrust of Mexicans and increasing economic problems.
# SENT:  Salinas left Zedillo's government to deal with the Mexican peso crisis, requiring a $50 billion IMF bailout.
# SENT:  Mexico has nine distinct regions: Baja California, the Pacific Coastal Lowlands, the Mexican Plateau, the Sierra Madre Oriental, the Sierra Madre Occidental, the Cordillera Neo-Volcánica, the Gulf Coastal Plain, the Southern Highlands, and the Yucatán Peninsula.
# SENT:  From east to west at the center, the country is crossed by the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt also known as the Sierra Nevada.
# SENT:  As such, the majority of the Mexican central and northern territories are located at high altitudes, and the highest elevations are found at the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt: Pico de Orizaba (5,700 m or 18,701 ft), Popocatépetl (5,462 m or 17,920 ft) and Iztaccihuatl (5,286 m or 17,343 ft) and the Nevado de Toluca (4,577 m or 15,016 ft).
# SENT:  The Papaloapan River flows into the Gulf of Mexico south of Veracruz, the Grijalva and Usumacinta further southeast are significant Mexican rivers.
# SENT:  Both Mexican coasts, except for the south coast of the Bay of Campeche and northern Baja California, are also vulnerable to serious hurricanes during the summer and fall.
# SENT:  About 2,500 species are protected by Mexican legislations.In 2002, Mexico had the second fastest rate of deforestation in the world, second only to Brazil.
# SENT:  The United Mexican States are a federation whose government is representative, democratic and republican based on a presidential system according to the 1917 Constitution.
# SENT:  Of these, 64 senators (two for each state and two for Mexico City) are elected by plurality vote in pairs; 32 senators are the first minority or first-runner up (one for each state and one for Mexico City), and 32 are elected by proportional representation from national closed party lists.The executive is the President of the United Mexican States, who is the head of state and government, as well as the commander-in-chief of the Mexican military forces.
# SENT:  Three parties have historically been the dominant parties in Mexican politics: the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), a catch-all party and member of the Socialist International that was founded in 1929 to unite all the factions of the Mexican Revolution and held an almost hegemonic power in Mexican politics since then; the National Action Party (PAN), a conservative party founded in 1939 and belonging to the Christian Democrat Organization of America; and the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) a left-wing party, founded in 1989 as the successor of the coalition of socialists and liberal parties.
# SENT:  A new political party, National Regeneration Movement (MORENA), a leftist-populist party, emerged after the 2012 election and dominated the 2018 Mexican general election.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:15, WORD1_SENTS:48, WORD2_SENTS:35
# WORDPAIR: Egypt Arabic
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_Arabic
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_Arabic_Wikipedia
# SENT:  The Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia (Egyptian Arabic: ويكيبيديا مصرى  [wikiˈbedjæ ˈmɑsˤɾi, wikiˈpidjæ], ⟨wykybydya mṣry⟩) is the Egyptian Arabic version of Wikipedia, a free, open-content encyclopedia.
# SENT:  This Wikipedia primarily acts as an alternative to the Arabic Wikipedia in favor of speakers of the Egyptian dialect.
# SENT:  Until 2020, it was the only Wikipedia written in a localised dialect of Arabic.
# SENT:  In December 2022, it was the third most visited language Wikipedia in Egypt with 2 million page views.
# SENT:  It ranked below the Arabic Wikipedia (43 million) and the English Wikipedia (18 million).
# SENT:  The Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia was proposed on 30 March 2008 and started as a developing project on 2 April 2008 in the Wikimedia Incubator.
# SENT:  A Wikipedian with the username Ghaly was the founder of the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia.
# SENT:  Dr. Ivan Panović, the author of "The Beginnings of Wikipedia Masry," described Ghaly as the spiritus movens of the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia.
# SENT:  On 24 November 2008, the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia was officially launched, and the Incubator articles were transferred to the new domain.
# SENT:  In 2009, the project had 4,000 articles, and Wikipedians participating came from within and outside Egypt.
# SENT:  "As of September 2018, 60% of Wikipedia views in Egypt were directed at Arabic Wikipedia, 33% to English Wikipedia, 3% to Russian Wikipedia and 2% to Egyptian Arabic one.
# SENT:  About 35% of Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia views come from Egypt, about 11% from the United States and Saudi Arabia, and about 5% from Morocco, Algeria and Iraq.
# SENT:  The origin of the proposal for the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia is based on the active interest of some Egyptian Wikipedians in contributing articles, especially on the Arabic Wikipedia, as they constitute large group of the serious contributors in that Wikipedia.The idea behind the creation of the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia is to have an encyclopedia that is written in the language that Egyptians use in their everyday lives.
# SENT:  It is hoped this will be much easier for Egyptians to read and encourage more Egyptians to contribute to Wikipedia.Panović stated that "it is clear that Masry Wikipedians are the proponents of Egyptian territorial nationalism of a kind that sets itself apart from Arab or Islamic nationalism, seeking to carve out a specifically Egyptian identity" and he argued that therefore there was an "ease" in which the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedians "seem to embrace and promote some radical and even erroneous ideas about language."
# SENT:  The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) classification of Egyptian Arabic under the language code arz is one of the arguments used by Egyptian Arabic Wikipedians for considering Masry an independent language.
# SENT:  The project uses the Cairene-style Egyptian Arabic.Ghaly, in the Wikimedia Foundation proposal page for the Egyptian Wikipedia, stated that his view of the Masry Wikipedia was that it would be "written in layperson terms and a mixture between Egyptian slang and simple Arabic", conveying "the information to speakers of Egyptian Arabic in a way similar to what Wikipedia Simple English is doing currently in comparison to Wikipedia English."
# SENT:  In response some Wikipedians criticized the proposal stating that it would be a Simple Arabic Wikipedia.
# SENT:  Ghaly responded, arguing that he did not intend to actually start a simple Arabic Wikipedia.As of August 2019, the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia has over 20,000 articles and continues to grow.
# SENT:  In addition, there is a project to develop an Egyptian Arabic Wiktionary, which is in the development phase as a project on Wikimedia incubator.
# SENT:  The Egyptian variant of Wikipedia was controversially received; supporters pointed to the number of Wikipedias written in regional languages and argued that Egyptian Arabic was a widely spoken variant of Arabic, while opponents perceived the creation of the Egyptian-language Wikipedia as an attack on the Arabic Wikipedia and argued that Standard Arabic was the standard language for media, and the use of a regional-language version was anachronistic.The Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia has been subject to controversy from the start, causing arguments between supporters and opponents.
# SENT:  This is a result of diglossia in Egypt, where the written language is a different dialect than the language used daily, which is not frequently written, although a certain amount of literature (particularly plays and poetry) exists written in the Egyptian dialect in Egypt.
# SENT:  Amira Samir of the Al-Ahram Hebdo reported that some Egyptians on the internet did not have a problem with the project, arguing that the Wikimedia Foundation was an independent body and therefore the Egyptian government could not force the inclusion or exclusion of any particular dialect.
# SENT:  Samir stated that many online users believed that the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia was an attack on the Arabic language.
# SENT:  The primary criticism of the Wikipedia Masry involves the belief that a "degradation" of Arabic occurred when someone writes in a dialect.
# SENT:  According to Panović, many of the critics took note that many involved with the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia were Christian and that they perceived the project to be antagonistic against the Arab identity and Islam.
# SENT:  According to Samir, some critics argued that the Egyptian Arabic language has a lack of rules and variations of meanings in words, and so it is an unsuitable language for an encyclopedia.Opposition to this version of Wikipedia has been strong during the proposal stage; opposition continued after the project officially launched including campaigns on Facebook.
# SENT:  Some of these campaigns encouraged users to vandalize the Egyptian Wikipedia.
# SENT:  The main point which the opposition focuses on is that Egyptian Arabic is not a language, suggesting that the effort should be directed to development of Arabic Wikipedia.
# SENT:  Panović, Ivan (University of Oxford Faculty of Oriental Studies).
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egypt
# SENT:  Egypt (Arabic: مصر Miṣr [mesˁr], Egyptian Arabic pronunciation: [mɑsˤr]), officially the Arab Republic of Egypt, is a transcontinental country spanning the northeast corner of Africa and southwest corner of Asia via a land bridge formed by the Sinai Peninsula.
# SENT:  The Gulf of Aqaba in the northeast separates Egypt from Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
# SENT:  Cairo is the capital and largest city of Egypt, while Alexandria, the second-largest city, is an important industrial and tourist hub at the Mediterranean coast.
# SENT:  At approximately 100 million inhabitants, Egypt is the 14th-most populated country in the world.
# SENT:  Egypt has one of the longest histories of any country, tracing its heritage along the Nile Delta back to the 6th–4th millennia BCE.
# SENT:  Considered a cradle of civilisation, Ancient Egypt saw some of the earliest developments of writing, agriculture, urbanisation, organised religion and central government.
# SENT:  Egypt's long and rich cultural heritage is an integral part of its national identity, which reflects its unique transcontinental location being simultaneously Mediterranean, Middle Eastern and North African.
# SENT:  Egypt was an early and important centre of Christianity, but was largely Islamised in the seventh century and remains a predominantly Sunni Muslim country, albeit with a significant Christian minority, along with other lesser practiced faiths.
# SENT:  Modern Egypt dates back to 1922, when it gained independence from the British Empire as a monarchy.
# SENT:  Following the 1952 revolution, Egypt declared itself a republic, and in 1958 it merged with Syria to form the United Arab Republic, which dissolved in 1961.
# SENT:  Throughout the second half of the 20th century, Egypt endured social and religious strife and political instability, fighting several armed conflicts with Israel in 1948, 1956, 1967 and 1973, and occupying the Gaza Strip intermittently until 1967.
# SENT:  In 1978, Egypt signed the Camp David Accords, officially withdrawing from the Gaza Strip and recognising Israel.
# SENT:  After the Arab Spring, which led to the 2011 Egyptian revolution and overthrow of Hosni Mubarak, the country faced a protracted period of political unrest.
# SENT:  Egypt's current government, a semi-presidential republic led by Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, has been described by a number of watchdogs as authoritarian or heading an authoritarian regime, responsible for perpetuating the country's poor human rights record.
# SENT:  Islam is the official religion of Egypt and Arabic is its official language.
# SENT:  With over 100 million inhabitants, Egypt is the most populous country in North Africa, the Middle East, and the Arab world, the third-most populous in Africa (after Nigeria and Ethiopia), and the fourteenth-most populous in the world.
# SENT:  The large regions of the Sahara desert, which constitute most of Egypt's territory, are sparsely inhabited.
# SENT:  About 43% of Egypt's residents live across the country's urban areas, with most spread across the densely populated centres of greater Cairo, Alexandria and other major cities in the Nile Delta.
# SENT:  Egypt is considered to be a regional power in North Africa, the Middle East and the Muslim world, and a middle power worldwide.
# SENT:  Egypt is a founding member of the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Arab League, the African Union, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the World Youth Forum.
# SENT:  "Miṣr" (Arabic pronunciation: [mesˤɾ]; "مِصر") is the Classical Quranic Arabic and modern official name of Egypt, while "Maṣr" (Egyptian Arabic pronunciation: [mɑsˤɾ]; مَصر) is the local pronunciation in Egyptian Arabic.
# SENT:  The official language of the Republic is Literary Arabic.
# SENT:  The spoken languages are: Egyptian Arabic (68%), Sa'idi Arabic (29%), Eastern Egyptian Bedawi Arabic (1.6%), Sudanese Arabic (0.6%), Domari (0.3%), Nobiin (0.3%), Beja (0.1%), Siwi and others.
# SENT:  Egypt is a recognised cultural trend-setter of the Arabic-speaking world.
# SENT:  Contemporary Arabic and Middle-Eastern culture is heavily influenced by Egyptian literature, music, film and television.
# SENT:  Egypt gained a regional leadership role during the 1950s and 1960s, giving a further enduring boost to the standing of Egyptian culture in the Arabic-speaking world.
# SENT:  Egyptian identity evolved in the span of a long period of occupation to accommodate Islam, Christianity and Judaism; and a new language, Arabic, and its spoken descendant, Egyptian Arabic which is also based on many Ancient Egyptian words.The work of early 19th century scholar Rifa'a al-Tahtawi renewed interest in Egyptian antiquity and exposed Egyptian society to Enlightenment principles.
# SENT:  Egyptian novelists and poets were among the first to experiment with modern styles of Arabic literature, and the forms they developed have been widely imitated throughout the Arab world.
# SENT:  Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz was the first Arabic-language writer to win the Nobel Prize in Literature.
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_Arabic
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_Arabic_Wikipedia
# SENT:  The Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia (Egyptian Arabic: ويكيبيديا مصرى  [wikiˈbedjæ ˈmɑsˤɾi, wikiˈpidjæ], ⟨wykybydya mṣry⟩) is the Egyptian Arabic version of Wikipedia, a free, open-content encyclopedia.
# SENT:  This Wikipedia primarily acts as an alternative to the Arabic Wikipedia in favor of speakers of the Egyptian dialect.
# SENT:  Until 2020, it was the only Wikipedia written in a localised dialect of Arabic.
# SENT:  It ranked below the Arabic Wikipedia (43 million) and the English Wikipedia (18 million).
# SENT:  The Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia was proposed on 30 March 2008 and started as a developing project on 2 April 2008 in the Wikimedia Incubator.
# SENT:  A Wikipedian with the username Ghaly was the founder of the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:43, WORD1_SENTS:22, WORD2_SENTS:7
# WORDPAIR: Cairo Egypt
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greater_Cairo
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cairo_(disambiguation)
# PAGE:  https://hif.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egypt
# SENT:  Egypt (Arabic: مصر Miṣr [mesˁr], Egyptian Arabic pronunciation: [mɑsˤr]), officially the Arab Republic of Egypt, is a transcontinental country spanning the northeast corner of Africa and southwest corner of Asia via a land bridge formed by the Sinai Peninsula.
# SENT:  The Gulf of Aqaba in the northeast separates Egypt from Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
# SENT:  Cairo is the capital and largest city of Egypt, while Alexandria, the second-largest city, is an important industrial and tourist hub at the Mediterranean coast.
# SENT:  At approximately 100 million inhabitants, Egypt is the 14th-most populated country in the world.
# SENT:  Egypt has one of the longest histories of any country, tracing its heritage along the Nile Delta back to the 6th–4th millennia BCE.
# SENT:  Considered a cradle of civilisation, Ancient Egypt saw some of the earliest developments of writing, agriculture, urbanisation, organised religion and central government.
# SENT:  Egypt's long and rich cultural heritage is an integral part of its national identity, which reflects its unique transcontinental location being simultaneously Mediterranean, Middle Eastern and North African.
# SENT:  Egypt was an early and important centre of Christianity, but was largely Islamised in the seventh century and remains a predominantly Sunni Muslim country, albeit with a significant Christian minority, along with other lesser practiced faiths.
# SENT:  Modern Egypt dates back to 1922, when it gained independence from the British Empire as a monarchy.
# SENT:  Following the 1952 revolution, Egypt declared itself a republic, and in 1958 it merged with Syria to form the United Arab Republic, which dissolved in 1961.
# SENT:  Throughout the second half of the 20th century, Egypt endured social and religious strife and political instability, fighting several armed conflicts with Israel in 1948, 1956, 1967 and 1973, and occupying the Gaza Strip intermittently until 1967.
# SENT:  In 1978, Egypt signed the Camp David Accords, officially withdrawing from the Gaza Strip and recognising Israel.
# SENT:  After the Arab Spring, which led to the 2011 Egyptian revolution and overthrow of Hosni Mubarak, the country faced a protracted period of political unrest.
# SENT:  Egypt's current government, a semi-presidential republic led by Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, has been described by a number of watchdogs as authoritarian or heading an authoritarian regime, responsible for perpetuating the country's poor human rights record.
# SENT:  Islam is the official religion of Egypt and Arabic is its official language.
# SENT:  With over 100 million inhabitants, Egypt is the most populous country in North Africa, the Middle East, and the Arab world, the third-most populous in Africa (after Nigeria and Ethiopia), and the fourteenth-most populous in the world.
# SENT:  The large regions of the Sahara desert, which constitute most of Egypt's territory, are sparsely inhabited.
# SENT:  About 43% of Egypt's residents live across the country's urban areas, with most spread across the densely populated centres of greater Cairo, Alexandria and other major cities in the Nile Delta.
# SENT:  Egypt is considered to be a regional power in North Africa, the Middle East and the Muslim world, and a middle power worldwide.
# SENT:  Egypt is a founding member of the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Arab League, the African Union, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the World Youth Forum.
# SENT:  "Miṣr" (Arabic pronunciation: [mesˤɾ]; "مِصر") is the Classical Quranic Arabic and modern official name of Egypt, while "Maṣr" (Egyptian Arabic pronunciation: [mɑsˤɾ]; مَصر) is the local pronunciation in Egyptian Arabic.
# SENT:  The name is of Semitic origin, directly cognate with other Semitic words for Egypt such as the Hebrew "מִצְרַיִם‎" ("Miṣráyim/Mitzráyim/Mizráim").
# SENT:  The oldest attestation of this name for Egypt is the Akkadian "mi-iṣ-ru" ("miṣru") related to miṣru/miṣirru/miṣaru, meaning "border" or "frontier".
# SENT:  There is evidence of rock carvings along the Nile terraces and in desert oases.
# SENT:  Climate changes or overgrazing around 8000 BCE began to desiccate the pastoral lands of Egypt, forming the Sahara.
# SENT:  During the Neolithic era, several predynastic cultures developed independently in Upper and Lower Egypt.
# SENT:  The Badarian culture and the successor Naqada series are generally regarded as precursors to dynastic Egypt.
# SENT:  The earliest known Lower Egyptian site, Merimda, predates the Badarian by about seven hundred years.
# SENT:  Contemporaneous Lower Egyptian communities coexisted with their southern counterparts for more than two thousand years, remaining culturally distinct, but maintaining frequent contact through trade.
# SENT:  The earliest known evidence of Egyptian hieroglyphic inscriptions appeared during the predynastic period on Naqada III pottery vessels, dated to about 3200 BCE.
# SENT:  A unified kingdom was founded c. 3150 BCE by King Menes, leading to a series of dynasties that ruled Egypt for the next three millennia.
# SENT:  Egyptian culture flourished during this long period and remained distinctively Egyptian in its religion, arts, language and customs.
# SENT:  The first two ruling dynasties of a unified Egypt set the stage for the Old Kingdom period, c. 2700–2200 BCE, which constructed many pyramids, most notably the Third Dynasty pyramid of Djoser and the Fourth Dynasty Giza pyramids.
# SENT:  A second period of disunity heralded the arrival of the first foreign ruling dynasty in Egypt, that of the Semitic Hyksos.
# SENT:  The Hyksos invaders took over much of Lower Egypt around 1650 BCE and founded a new capital at Avaris.
# SENT:  They were driven out by an Upper Egyptian force led by Ahmose I, who founded the Eighteenth Dynasty and relocated the capital from Memphis to Thebes.
# SENT:  The New Kingdom c. 1550–1070 BCE began with the Eighteenth Dynasty, marking the rise of Egypt as an international power that expanded during its greatest extension to an empire as far south as Tombos in Nubia, and included parts of the Levant in the east.
# SENT:  The country was later invaded and conquered by Libyans, Nubians and Assyrians, but native Egyptians eventually drove them out and regained control of their country.
# SENT:  In 525 BCE, the powerful Achaemenid Persians, led by Cambyses II, began their conquest of Egypt, eventually capturing the pharaoh Psamtik III at the battle of Pelusium.
# SENT:  Cambyses II then assumed the formal title of pharaoh, but ruled Egypt from his home of Susa in Persia (modern Iran), leaving Egypt under the control of a satrapy.
# SENT:  The entire Twenty-seventh Dynasty of Egypt, from 525 to 402 BCE, save for Petubastis III, was an entirely Persian ruled period, with the Achaemenid Emperors all being granted the title of pharaoh.
# SENT:  A few temporarily successful revolts against the Persians marked the fifth century BCE, but Egypt was never able to permanently overthrow the Persians.The Thirtieth Dynasty was the last native ruling dynasty during the Pharaonic epoch.
# SENT:  This Thirty-first Dynasty of Egypt, however, did not last long, as the Persians were toppled several decades later by Alexander the Great.
# SENT:  The Ptolemaic Kingdom was a powerful Hellenistic state, extending from southern Syria in the east, to Cyrene to the west, and south to the frontier with Nubia.
# SENT:  To gain recognition by the native Egyptian populace, they named themselves as the successors to the Pharaohs.
# SENT:  The later Ptolemies took on Egyptian traditions, had themselves portrayed on public monuments in Egyptian style and dress, and participated in Egyptian religious life.The last ruler from the Ptolemaic line was Cleopatra VII, who committed suicide following the burial of her lover Mark Antony who had died in her arms (from a self-inflicted stab wound), after Octavian had captured Alexandria and her mercenary forces had fled.
# SENT:  The Ptolemies faced rebellions of native Egyptians often caused by an unwanted regime and were involved in foreign and civil wars that led to the decline of the kingdom and its annexation by Rome.
# SENT:  Nevertheless, Hellenistic culture continued to thrive in Egypt well after the Muslim conquest.
# SENT:  Christianity was brought to Egypt by Saint Mark the Evangelist in the 1st century.
# SENT:  Diocletian's reign (284–305 CE) marked the transition from the Roman to the Byzantine era in Egypt, when a great number of Egyptian Christians were persecuted.
# SENT:  Cairo was later built in the year 986 to grow to become the largest and richest city in the Arab caliphate, second only to Baghdad and one of the biggest and richest in the world.
# SENT:  Muslim rulers remained in control of Egypt for the next six centuries, with Cairo as the seat of the Fatimid Caliphate.
# SENT:  On the night of 4 February 1942, British troops and tanks surrounded Abdeen Palace in Cairo and Lampson presented Farouk with an ultimatum.
# SENT:  The next day, 26 January 1952 was "Black Saturday", as the anti-British riot was known, that saw much of downtown Cairo which the Khedive Ismail the Magnificent had rebuilt in the style of Paris, burned down.
# SENT:  Mass poverty and unemployment led rural families to stream into cities like Cairo where they ended up in crowded slums, barely managing to survive.
# SENT:  Hotels, nightclubs, restaurants and casinos were attacked in Cairo and there were riots in other cities.
# SENT:  On 11 February 2011, Mubarak resigned and fled Cairo.
# SENT:  Jubilant celebrations broke out in Cairo's Tahrir Square at the news.
# SENT:  Even though the interim authorities extended voting to a third day, the 46% turnout was lower than the 52% turnout in the 2012 election.A new parliamentary election was held in December 2015, resulting in a landslide victory for pro-Sisi parties, which secured a strong majority in the newly formed House of Representatives.In 2016, Egypt entered in a diplomatic crisis with Italy following the murder of researcher Giulio Regeni: in April 2016, Prime Minister Matteo Renzi recalled the Italian ambassador from Cairo because of lack of co-operation from the Egyptian Government in the investigation.
# SENT:  Towns and cities include Alexandria, the second largest city; Aswan; Asyut; Cairo, the modern Egyptian capital and largest city; El Mahalla El Kubra; Giza, the site of the Pyramid of Khufu; Hurghada; Luxor; Kom Ombo; Port Safaga; Port Said; Sharm El Sheikh; Suez, where the south end of the Suez Canal is located; Zagazig; and Minya.
# SENT:  South of Cairo, rainfall averages only around 2 to 5 mm (0.1 to 0.2 in) per year and at intervals of many years.
# SENT:  A very small amount of snow fell on Cairo on 13 December 2013, the first time in many decades.
# SENT:  In July 2019, UN ambassadors of 37 countries, including Egypt, have signed a joint letter to the UNHRC defending China's treatment of Uyghurs in the Xinjiang region.The permanent headquarters of the Arab League are located in Cairo and the body's secretary general has traditionally been Egyptian.
# SENT:  The Arab League briefly moved from Egypt to Tunis in 1978 to protest the Egypt–Israel peace treaty, but it later returned to Cairo in 1989.
# SENT:  According to a 2013 survey by the Pew Research Center, 95% of Egyptians believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society.In 2017, Cairo was voted the most dangerous megacity for women with more than 10 million inhabitants in a poll by Thomson Reuters Foundation.
# SENT:  Transport in Egypt is centred around Cairo and largely follows the pattern of settlement along the Nile.
# SENT:  The Cairo Metro in Egypt is the first of only two full-fledged metro systems in Africa and the Arab World.
# SENT:  The airline is based at Cairo International Airport, its main hub, operating scheduled passenger and freight services to more than 75 destinations in the Middle East, Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Americas.
# SENT:  Egypt's population was estimated at 3 million when Napoleon invaded the country in 1798.Egypt's people are highly urbanised, being concentrated along the Nile (notably Cairo and Alexandria), in the Delta and near the Suez Canal.
# SENT:  Several important Jewish archaeological and historical sites are found in Cairo, Alexandria and other cities.
# SENT:  Cairo is famous for its numerous mosque minarets and has been dubbed "The City of 1,000 Minarets".
# SENT:  Non-native Christian communities are largely found in the urban regions of Cairo and Alexandria, such as the Syro-Lebanese, who belong to Greek Catholic, Greek Orthodox, and Maronite Catholic denominations.Ethnic Greeks also made up a large Greek Orthodox population in the past.
# SENT:  Graduates of these schools may have access to higher education based on their results on the final exam, but this is generally uncommon.Cairo University is Egypt's premier public university.
# SENT:  The Cairo Opera House serves as the main performing arts venue in the Egyptian capital.
# SENT:  The Cairo International Film Festival has been rated as one of 11 festivals with a top class rating worldwide by the International Federation of Film Producers' Associations.The number of cinemas increased with the emergence of talking films, and reached 395 in 1958.
# SENT:  The Cairo Derby is one of the fiercest derbies in Africa, and the BBC picked it as one of the 7 toughest derbies in the world.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Egypt
# SENT:  Using the Whit Athey's haplogroup predictor, they identified the Y chromosomal haplogroup E1b1a (E-M2).In 2017, a team led by researchers from the University of Tuebingen and the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History in Jena tested the maternal DNA (mitochondrial) of 90 mummies from Abusir el-Meleq in northern Egypt (near Cairo), which was the first reliable data using high-throughput DNA sequencing methods.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_of_Egypt
# SENT:  Egypt receives between 20 mm (0.79 in) and 200 mm (7.87 in) of annual average precipitation along the narrow Mediterranean coast, but south from Cairo, the average drops to nearly 0 millimetres (0.00 inches) in the central and the southern part of the country.
# SENT:  It usually snows on the Sinai mountains, but it almost never snows in the cities of Giza, Cairo, and Alexandria.
# SENT:  For example, in December 2013, Cairo received a single overnight snowfall for the first time since 1901.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_Cairo
# SENT:  The following is a timeline of the history of the city of Cairo, Egypt.
# SENT:  979 – Saint Mercurius Church in Coptic Cairo rebuilt (approximate date).
# SENT:  1073 – Saint Barbara Church in Coptic Cairo restored.
# SENT:  1092 – City wall and Gates of Cairo built (including Bab Zuweila and Bab al-Nasr).
# SENT:  1168 – Egypt's capital moved from Fustat to Cairo.
# SENT:  1176 – Cairo was unsuccessfully attacked in the Crusades.
# SENT:  January: Battle of Ridaniya occurs near Cairo.
# SENT:  Capture of Cairo by Ottoman forces.
# SENT:  1801 – June: Siege of Cairo – French surrender to British and Ottoman forces.
# SENT:  Al-Ahram newspaper headquartered in Cairo.
# SENT:  Cairo University and Café Riche opened.
# SENT:  American University in Cairo established.
# SENT:  1921 – Cairo Conference held.
# SENT:  "Cairo Edition" of Quran Published
# SENT:  Society Of The Muslim Brothers headquartered in Cairo.
# SENT:  1934 – St. George's College, Cairo established.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heliopolis,_Cairo
# SENT:  "New Egypt") was a suburb outside Cairo, Egypt, which has since merged with Cairo as a district of the city and is one of the more affluent areas of Cairo.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:19, WORD1_SENTS:31, WORD2_SENTS:48
# WORDPAIR: Brazil Real
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazilian_real
# SENT:  The Brazilian real (pl.
# SENT:  reais;  sign: R$; code: BRL) is the official currency of Brazil.
# SENT:  The Central Bank of Brazil is the central bank and the issuing authority.
# SENT:  The old Brazilian real from 1747 to 1942, with 1,000 réis also called the milréis.
# SENT:  The modern real (Portuguese plural reais or English plural reals) was introduced on 1 July 1994, during the presidency of Itamar Franco, when Rubens Ricupero was the Minister of Finance as part of a broader plan to stabilize the Brazilian economy, known as the Plano Real.
# SENT:  Combined with all previous currency changes in the country's history, this reform made the new real equal to 2.75 × 1018 (2.75 quintillion) of Brazil's original réis.
# SENT:  Between 1996 and 1998 the exchange rate was tightly controlled by the Central Bank of Brazil, so that the real depreciated slowly and smoothly in relation to the dollar, dropping from near US$1=R$1 to about US$1=R$1.2 by the end of 1998.
# SENT:  Many Brazilians feared another default on government debts or a resumption of heterodox economic policies, and rushed to exchange their reais into tangible assets or foreign currencies.
# SENT:  In May 2007, for the first time since 2001 (six years), the real became worth more than US$0.50 — even though the Central Bank, concerned about its effect on the Brazilian economy, had tried to keep it below that symbolic threshold.
# SENT:  On 13 May 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, which deeply affected Brazil, the real reached a historical low against the US dollar, being negotiated at US$1=R$5.90.Following Lula's reelection in the 2022 general elections, the market, which was expected to have reacted poorly, turned out favorable in the first week.
# SENT:  Along with the first series of currency, coins were introduced in denominations of 1, 5, 10 and 50 centavos and 1 real on 30 June 1994; the 25 centavos piece was soon followed on 30 September 1994 due to the constant lack of change in intermediate values ​​in the centavos range, which caused the validity of the old Cruzeiro and Cruzeiro Real banknotes to be extended for two months beyond what was initially intended for the exchange of banknotes and coins until then in circulation for new ones in the pattern that began to circulate in the second half of 1994.
# SENT:  In 1995, to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Food and Agriculture Organization, the Central Bank of Brazil released two commemorative variants of the 10 and 25 centavos coins.
# SENT:  On occasion, the Central Bank of Brazil has issued special commemorative versions of some of the standard coins.
# SENT:  Despite the initial skepticism, it was later supposedly confirmed via FOIA requests and interviews that Casa da Moeda do Brasil had minted trial strikes of the R$1 coin prior to the currency design change in 1998, with custom designs that were purposefully different to the final product as to avoid leaks.In May 2021, however, Bentes Group published an explanation as to why the "Real Bromélia" was not included in their Brazilian coins catalog.
# SENT:  In 2000 and 2001, the 2 and 20 reais banknotes were launched, respectively, using the sea turtle and the golden lion tamarin in the watermark and theme, and the 20 reais banknote was the first to make use of holographic elements on the Brazilian banknotes.
# SENT:  In April 2000, in commemoration of the 500th anniversary of the Portuguese arrival on Brazilian shores, the Brazilian Central Bank released a polymer 10 real banknote that circulated along with the other banknotes above.
# SENT:  The Brazilian Mint printed 250 million of these notes, which at the time accounted for about half of the 10 real banknotes in circulation.
# SENT:  On 3 February 2010, the Central Bank of Brazil announced the new series of the real banknotes which would begin to be released in April 2010.
# SENT:  The changes were made reflecting the growth of the Brazilian economy and the need for a stronger and safer currency.
# SENT:  On 29 July 2020, the Central Bank of Brazil announced the release of the 200 reais banknote.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazilian_currency
# SENT:  The Brazilian currency has been renamed and redefined several times through its history.
# SENT:  Since 1994, the official one is the Brazilian real (plural reais, with symbol R$ and ISO code BRL.
# SENT:  Not considering inflation, one modern Brazilian real is equivalent to 2,750,000,000,000,000,000 times the old real, that is, 2.75×1018 (2.75 quintillion) réis.
# SENT:  The following tables indicate what banknotes were present in each of the currencies of Brazil, except for the provisional issues of banknotes to exchange gold in the colonial period:
# SENT:  No single face value has been present in all historical Brazilian banknotes.
# SENT:  The following tables indicate what coins were present in each of the currencies of Brazil, with the exception of réis:
# SENT:  No single face value has been present in all historical Brazilian coins.
# SENT:  
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazil
# SENT:  Brazil (Portuguese: Brasil; Brazilian Portuguese: [bɾaˈziw] (listen)), officially the Federative Republic of Brazil (Portuguese: República Federativa do Brasil), is the largest country in South America and in Latin America.
# SENT:  At 8.5 million square kilometers (3,300,000 sq mi) and with over 217 million people, Brazil is the world's fifth-largest country by area and the seventh most populous.
# SENT:  Bounded by the Atlantic Ocean on the east, Brazil has a coastline of 7,491 kilometers (4,655 mi).
# SENT:  This unique environmental heritage positions Brazil at number one of 17 megadiverse countries, and is the subject of significant global interest, as environmental degradation through processes like deforestation has direct impacts on global issues like climate change and biodiversity loss.
# SENT:  The territory which would become known as Brazil was inhabited by numerous tribal nations prior to the landing in 1500 of explorer Pedro Álvares Cabral, who claimed the discovered land for the Portuguese Empire.
# SENT:  Brazil remained a Portuguese colony until 1808 when the capital of the empire was transferred from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro.
# SENT:  In 1815, the colony was elevated to the rank of kingdom upon the formation of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves.
# SENT:  Independence was achieved in 1822 with the creation of the Empire of Brazil, a unitary state governed under a constitutional monarchy and a parliamentary system.
# SENT:  Brazil's current constitution, formulated in 1988, defines it as a democratic federal republic.
# SENT:  Due to its rich culture and history, the country ranks thirteenth in the world by number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.A major non-NATO ally of the United States, Brazil is a regional and middle power, and is also classified as an emerging power.
# SENT:  Categorised as developing country with a high Human Development Index, Brazil is considered an advanced emerging economy, having the twelfth largest GDP in the world by nominal, and ninth by PPP measures, the largest in Latin America.
# SENT:  As an upper-middle income economy by the World Bank and a newly industrialized country, Brazil has the largest share of global wealth in South America and it is one of the world's major breadbaskets, being the largest producer of coffee for the last 150 years.
# SENT:  Brazil is a founding member of the United Nations, the G20, BRICS, Mercosul, Organization of American States, Organization of Ibero-American States and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.
# SENT:  The word "Brazil" likely comes from the Portuguese word for brazilwood, a tree that once grew plentifully along the Brazilian coast.
# SENT:  As brazilwood produces a deep red dye, it was highly valued by the European textile industry and was the earliest commercially exploited product from Brazil.
# SENT:  Throughout the 16th century, massive amounts of brazilwood were harvested by indigenous peoples (mostly Tupi) along the Brazilian coast, who sold the timber to European traders (mostly Portuguese, but also French) in return for assorted European consumer goods.The official Portuguese name of the land, in original Portuguese records, was the "Land of the Holy Cross" (Terra da Santa Cruz), but European sailors and merchants commonly called it the "Land of Brazil" (Terra do Brasil) because of the brazilwood trade.
# SENT:  "In the Guaraní language, an official language of Paraguay, Brazil is called "Pindorama".
# SENT:  The earliest pottery ever found in the Western Hemisphere was excavated in the Amazon basin of Brazil and radiocarbon dated to 8,000 years ago (6000 BC).
# SENT:  The Marajoara culture flourished on Marajó in the Amazon delta from AD 400 to 1400, developing sophisticated pottery, social stratification, large populations, mound building, and complex social formations such as chiefdoms.Around the time of the Portuguese arrival, the territory of current day Brazil had an estimated indigenous population of 7 million people, mostly semi-nomadic, who subsisted on hunting, fishing, gathering, and migrant agriculture.
# SENT:  The indigenous population of Brazil comprised several large indigenous ethnic groups (e.g., the Tupis, Guaranís, Gês, and Arawaks).
# SENT:  Following the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas, the land now called Brazil was claimed for the Portuguese Empire on 22 April 1500, with the arrival of the Portuguese fleet commanded by Pedro Álvares Cabral.
# SENT:  Though the first settlement was founded in 1532, colonization effectively began in 1534, when King John III of Portugal divided the territory into the fifteen private and autonomous Captaincy Colonies of Brazil.However, the decentralized and unorganized tendencies of the captaincy colonies proved problematic, and in 1549 the Portuguese king restructured them into the Governorate General of Brazil in the city of Salvador, which became the capital of a single and centralized Portuguese colony in South America.
# SENT:  In the first two centuries of colonization, Indigenous and European groups lived in constant war, establishing opportunistic alliances in order to gain advantages against each other.By the mid-16th century, cane sugar had become Brazil's most important export, while slaves purchased in Sub-Saharan Africa in the slave market of Western Africa (not only those from Portuguese allies of their colonies in Angola and Mozambique), had become its largest import, to cope with plantations of sugarcane, due to increasing international demand for Brazilian sugar.
# SENT:  In 1994, Cardoso produced a highly successful Plano Real, that, after decades of failed economic plans made by previous governments attempting to curb hyperinflation, finally stabilized the Brazilian economy.
# SENT:  Brazilian painting emerged in the late 16th century, influenced by Baroque, Rococo, Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Realism, Modernism, Expressionism, Surrealism, Cubism and Abstracionism making it a major art style called Brazilian academic art.The French Artistic Mission arrived in Brazil in 1816 proposing the creation of an art academy modeled after the respected Académie des Beaux-Arts, with graduation courses both for artists and craftsmen for activities such as modeling, decorating, carpentry and others and bringing artists like Jean-Baptiste Debret.Upon the creation of the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts, new artistic movements spread across the country during the 19th century and later the event called Modern Art Week definitely broke with academic tradition in 1922 and started a nationalist trend which was influenced by modernist arts.Among the best-known Brazilian painters are Ricardo do Pilar and Manuel da Costa Ataíde (baroque and rococo), Victor Meirelles, Pedro Américo and Almeida Júnior (romanticism and realism), Anita Malfatti, Ismael Nery, Lasar Segall, Emiliano di Cavalcanti, Vicente do Rego Monteiro, and Tarsila do Amaral (expressionism, surrealism and cubism), Aldo Bonadei, José Pancetti and Cândido Portinari (modernism).
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazilian_cruzeiro_real
# SENT:  The cruzeiro real was replaced with the current Brazilian real as part of the Plano Real.
# SENT:  No commemorative coins were issued for the Cruzeiro Real.
# SENT:  The macaw and jaguar were represented again in the Real's R$10 and R$50 bills, respectively, after their introduction in 1994, and the maned wolf was later portrayed in the R$200 bill since its introduction in late 2020.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazilian_real_(old)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plano_Real
# SENT:  The Plano Real ("Real Plan", in English) was a set of measures taken to stabilize the Brazilian economy in 1994, during the presidency of Itamar Franco.
# SENT:  The Plano Real was based on an analysis of the root causes of hyperinflation in the New Republic of Brazil, that concluded that there was both an issue of fiscal policy and severe, widespread inertial inflation.
# SENT:  The Plano Real intended to stabilize the domestic currency in nominal terms after a string of failed plans to control inflation.
# SENT:  Plano Real then created a non-monetary currency, the Unidade Real de Valor ("URV"), whose value was set to approximately 1 US dollar.
# SENT:  The Plano Real intended to stabilize the domestic currency in nominal terms after a string of failed plans to control inflation.
# SENT:  It created the Unidade Real de Valor (Real Unit of Value), which served as a key step to the implementation of the new (and still current) currency, the real.
# SENT:  Stephen Kanitz was the first public intellectual to predict the future success of the Real Plan.A new currency called the real (plural reais) was introduced on 1 July 1994, as part of a broader plan to stabilize the Brazilian economy, replacing the short-lived cruzeiro real in the process.
# SENT:  The 2010-10-04 episode of NPR's Planet Money devoted to the Plano Real, describing it in simple terms
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Brazil
# SENT:  He was elected president due to the success of the so-called Plano Real.
# SENT:  As his victory became more certain, the Real devalued and Brazil's investment risk rating plummeted (the causes of these events are disputed, since Cardoso left a very small foreign reserve).
# SENT:  The Real and the nation's risk rating soon recovered.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy_of_Brazil
# SENT:  With increased economic stability provided by the Plano Real, Brazilian and multinational businesses have invested heavily in new equipment and technology, a large proportion of which has been purchased from U.S. firms.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperinflation_in_Brazil
# SENT:  In July 1990, price controls were lifted and hyperinflation returned.The period of hyperinflation was resolved after the implementation of the Plano Real (1994).
# SENT:  The Plano Real involved anchoring the economy to a separate unit of account, the Unidade Real de Valor (URV), instead of the currency, the cruzeiro.
# SENT:  Real return to government debt was distorted and caused Brazil to experience capital flight for the first time in their stabilisation policies.
# SENT:  The Plano Real involved anchoring the economy to a separate, distinct unit of account to reflect relative prices as the currency had lost this function.
# SENT:  Economic agents followed a new index, the Unidade Real de Valor (URV), which was established throughout February to June 1994 and adjusted daily.
# SENT:  The Plano Real was the subject of open discussion in Parliament weeks before its implementation.
# SENT:  This plan was successful and Brazil has been able to sustain single-digit inflation.The Plano Real was successful in limiting inflation seen in the significant reduction in monthly inflation in 1994 from 48% in June to 7.8% in July to 1.9% in August.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pel%C3%A9
# SENT:  1986 saw Wrexham make a return to European football with a first round draw against Maltese side FC Zurrieq, whom they beat 7–0 on aggregate to earn a second round tie against Real Zaragoza which they drew 2–2 with on aggregate but they went out on away-goals.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banco_Real
# SENT:  Banco Real was a Brazilian bank, owned by Spain's Banco Santander.
# SENT:  Banco Santander acquired Banco Real from the consortium, together with some other ABN AMRO operations in Italy, particularly Banca Antonveneta.
# SENT:  Combining its existing operations with Banco Real will make Banco Santander Brazil the third largest private bank in the country, after Banco Bradesco and Itaú.
# SENT:  Santander has named the CEO of Banco Real to be the head of the combined group in Brazil, with the charge to unify the operations; Santander transferred the CEO of Banco Santander Brazil to Madrid, and then to New York.
# SENT:  Banco Real traces its ancestry back to Banco da Lavoura de Minas Gerais, which was founded in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais in 1925.
# SENT:  On 1 March 1971, Banco da Lavoura moved its head office from Belo Horizonte to São Paulo and the bank assumed its current name, Banco Real S.A.
# SENT:  In 1973 Banco Real began to expand its operations abroad, creating Grupo Real del Paraguay (The Real Group of Paraguay), composed of a commercial bank and three other businesses.
# SENT:  In the following year, Banco Real opened a branch on the Brazilian island of Fernando de Noronha and acquired Banco de Minas Gerais, which operated 133 branches at that time.
# SENT:  On its 50th anniversary, in 1975, Banco Real operated 512 branches in Brazil, the biggest branch network in the country, in addition to 12 associated businesses including Companhia Real de Investimentos, then the number one in the domestic ranking.
# SENT:  In mid-1998, Banco ABN AMRO SA - the Brazilian subsidiary of ABN AMRO Bank - acquired Banco Real.
# SENT:  In November 1998 and November 2001 ABN AMRO-Banco Real acquired two Brazilian state-owned banks, Banco do Estado de Pernambuco S.A. (Bandepe) in Recife and Banco do Estado do Paraiba (Paraiban).
# SENT:  Then in October 2003, Banco Real acquired Banco Sudameris from Banca Intesa; in 1998, Sudameris had bought Banco América do Sul, which Japanese immigrants had founded in 1944.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_Brazil
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_currencies
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bras%C3%ADlia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neymar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cafu
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinier_Jesus
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J%C3%BAlio_Baptista
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazilians
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money
# WORDPAIR: Odisha Bhubaneswar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bhubaneswar
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar (; Odia: [ˈbʱubɔneswɔɾɔ, -ɕwɔɾ] (listen)) is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Odisha.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar is dubbed the "Temple City", a nickname earned because of the 700 temples which once stood there.
# SENT:  In contemporary times, it has emerged as an education hub and an attractive business destination.Although the modern city of Bhubaneswar was formally established in 1948, the history of the areas in and around the present-day city can be traced to the 7th century BCE and earlier.
# SENT:  With Puri and Konark it forms the 'Swarna Tribhuja' ("Golden Triangle"), one of Eastern India's most visited destinations.Bhubaneswar replaced Cuttack as the capital on 19 August 1949, two years after India gained its independence from Britain.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar and Cuttack are often referred to as the 'twin cities of Odisha'.
# SENT:  The Bhubaneswar metro area has a population of around a million people, and is categorised as a Tier-2 city.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar and Rourkela are the two cities in smart city mission from Odisha.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar is the anglicisation of the Odia name "Bhubaneśwara"(ଭୁବନେଶ୍ୱର), derived from the word Tribhubaneśwar (ତ୍ରିଭୁବନେଶ୍ୱର), which literally means the Lord (Iśwar) of the Three Worlds (Tribhuban), which refers to Shiva.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar stands near the ruins of Sisupalgarh, the ancient capital of the erstwhile province of Kalinga.
# SENT:  Dhauli, near Bhubaneswar was the site of the Kalinga War (c. 262-261 BCE), in which the Mauryan emperor Ashoka invaded and annexed Kalinga.
# SENT:  His Hathigumpha inscription is located at the Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves near Bhubaneswar.
# SENT:  Their capital Kalinganagara was located in present-day Bhubaneswar City.
# SENT:  Most of the older temples in Bhubaneswar were built between 8th and 12th centuries, under Shaiva influence.
# SENT:  Because of this, on 30 September 1946, a proposal to move the capital to a new capital was introduced in the Legislative Assembly of the Odisha Province.
# SENT:  After independence of India, the foundation of the new capital was laid by Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru on 13 April 1948.The name of the new capital came from "Tribhubaneswara" or "Bhubaneswara" (literally "Lord of the Earth"), a name of Shiva, the deity of the Lingaraja temple.
# SENT:  The Legislative Assembly of Odisha was shifted from Cuttack to Bhubaneswar in 1949.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar was built as a modern city, designed by German architect Otto Königsberger with wide roads, gardens and parks.
# SENT:  By the 1991 census, the population of Bhubaneswar had increased to 411,542.
# SENT:  Accordingly, on 14 August 1994, the Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation was established.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar is in Khordha district of Odisha.
# SENT:  It lies southwest of the Mahanadi River that forms the northern boundary of Bhubaneswar metropolitan area, within its delta.
# SENT:  The city is bounded by the Daya River to the south and the Kuakhai River to the east; the Chandaka Wildlife Sanctuary and Nandankanan Zoo lie in the western and northern parts of Bhubaneswar, respectively.Bhubaneswar is topographically divided into western uplands and eastern lowlands, with hillocks in the western and northern parts.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar's soils are 65 per cent laterite, 25 per cent alluvial and 10 per cent sandstone.
# SENT:  The 1999 Odisha cyclone caused major damage to buildings, the city's infrastructure and cost many human lives.
# SENT:  The Bhubaneswar urban development area consists of the Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation area, 173 revenue villages and two other municipalities spread over 1,110 km2 (430 sq mi).
# SENT:  The area under the jurisdiction of the Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation covers 186 square kilometres (72 sq mi).
# SENT:  Indira Gandhi Park, Gandhi Park and the Biju Patnaik Park are located in the unit.The added areas are mostly areas lying north of National Highway 5, including Nayapalli, Jayadev Vihar, Chandrasekharpur and Sailashree Vihar, Niladri vihar which were developed by Bhubaneswar Development Authority to house the growing population.
# SENT:  With the development of the new areas such as Chandrasekharpur the city is now divided roughly into North(newer areas) and South Bhubaneswar (older areas) by the NH-5 highway.
# SENT:  The Master Planning Branch of the Bhubaneswar Development Authority developed the Comprehensive Development Plan (CDP) in 2010.
# SENT:  According to the Odisha Development Authorities Act, 1982, the Development Authority has control over the planning for municipal areas.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar secured the top rank in the Smart city list in India.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar has a tropical savanna climate, designated Aw under the Köppen climate classification.
# SENT:  Extreme temperatures have ranged from 8.2 to 46.7 °C (46.8 to 116.1 °F).Rains brought by the Bay of Bengal branch of the south west summer monsoon lash Bhubaneswar between June and September, supplying it with most of its annual rainfall of 1,657.8 mm (65 in).
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar is an administrative, information technology, education and tourism city.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar was ranked as the best place to do business in India by the World Bank in 2014.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar has emerged as one of the fast-growing, important trading and commercial hub in the state and eastern India.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar was designed to be a largely residential city with outlying industrial areas.
# SENT:  With the economic liberalisation policy adopted by the Government of India in the 1990s, Bhubaneswar received investment in telecommunications, information technology (IT) and higher education.In 2011, according to a study by Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India, Bhubaneswar had the highest rate of employment growth among 17 Tier-2 cities in India.
# SENT:  In 2012, Bhubaneswar was ranked third among Indian cities, in starting and operating a business by the World Bank.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar has been traditionally home to handicrafts industry, including silver filigree work, appliqué work, stone and wood carvings and patta painting, which significantly contributes to the city's economy.
# SENT:  The late 2000s saw a surge of investments in the real estate, infrastructure, retail and hospitality sectors; several shopping malls and organised retails opened outlets in Bhubaneswar.
# SENT:  ); 2.18% worked in the secondary sector (industrial and manufacturing); and 95.67% worked in the tertiary sector (service industries).The Department of Industries established four industrial areas in and around Bhubaneswar, in the Rasulgarh, Mancheswar, Chandaka, and Bhagabanpur areas.
# SENT:  Industrial sector in Bhubaneswar includes paper, steel, automobile, food, pharma and electronics industries.
# SENT:  A large number of companies including Odisha State Cooperative Milk Producers' Federation, Bharat Biotech, Topaz Solar, Britannia Industries, SMS Group and Jockey International have there manufacturing plant.In 2009, Odisha was ranked ninth among Indian states in terms of software export by NASSCOM, with most IT/ITES companies established in Bhubaneswar.
# SENT:  In 2011–12, Odisha had a growth rate of 17% for software exports.
# SENT:  According to a 2012 survey, among the tier-2 cities in India, Bhubaneswar has been chosen as the best for conducting IT/ITES business.
# SENT:  The government fostered growth by developing of IT parks such as Infocity-1, Infovalley, STPI-Bhubaneswar and JSS STP.
# SENT:  Infosys and Tech Mahindra have been present in Bhubaneswar since 1996.
# SENT:  Apart from the big multinationals, some 300 small and mid-size IT companies and business startups have offices in Bhubaneswar.
# SENT:  As per the 2011 census of India, Bhubaneswar had a population of 837,737, while the metropolitan area had a population of 881,988.
# SENT:  As per the estimate of IIT Kharagpur, which made a development plan, the Bhubaneswar–Cuttack Urban complex, consisting of 721.9 square kilometres (278.7 sq mi), has a population of 1.9 million (as of 2008).
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar's literacy rate is 93.15 per cent—significantly higher than the national average of 74.04 per cent.
# SENT:  Growth in the information technology industry and education sector in Bhubaneswar changed the city's demographic profile; likely infrastructure strains and haphazard growth from demographic changes have been a cause of concern.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar is a very religiously diverse city.
# SENT:  As the seat of the Government of Odisha, Bhubaneswar is home to the Odisha Legislative Assembly and the state secretariat.
# SENT:  Electricity is supplied by the state-operated Central Electricity Supply Utility of Odisha.
# SENT:  Fire services are handled by the state agency Odisha Fire Service.
# SENT:  Utkal University Bhubaneswar is the oldest university in Odisha and the 17th oldest university in India.
# SENT:  BSE, Odisha
# SENT:  CHSE, Odisha
# SENT:  SCTE&VT, OdishaNotable union government schools in the city include
# PAGE:  https://sco.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bhubaneswar
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar (; Odia: [ˈbʱubɔneswɔɾɔ, -ɕwɔɾ] (listen)) is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Odisha.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar and Cuttack are often referred to as the 'twin cities of Odisha'.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar and Rourkela are the two cities in smart city mission from Odisha.
# SENT:  Because of this, on 30 September 1946, a proposal to move the capital to a new capital was introduced in the Legislative Assembly of the Odisha Province.
# SENT:  The Legislative Assembly of Odisha was shifted from Cuttack to Bhubaneswar in 1949.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar is in Khordha district of Odisha.
# SENT:  The 1999 Odisha cyclone caused major damage to buildings, the city's infrastructure and cost many human lives.
# SENT:  According to the Odisha Development Authorities Act, 1982, the Development Authority has control over the planning for municipal areas.
# SENT:  A large number of companies including Odisha State Cooperative Milk Producers' Federation, Bharat Biotech, Topaz Solar, Britannia Industries, SMS Group and Jockey International have there manufacturing plant.In 2009, Odisha was ranked ninth among Indian states in terms of software export by NASSCOM, with most IT/ITES companies established in Bhubaneswar.
# SENT:  In 2011–12, Odisha had a growth rate of 17% for software exports.
# SENT:  As the seat of the Government of Odisha, Bhubaneswar is home to the Odisha Legislative Assembly and the state secretariat.
# SENT:  Electricity is supplied by the state-operated Central Electricity Supply Utility of Odisha.
# SENT:  Fire services are handled by the state agency Odisha Fire Service.
# SENT:  Utkal University Bhubaneswar is the oldest university in Odisha and the 17th oldest university in India.
# SENT:  BSE, Odisha
# SENT:  CHSE, Odisha
# SENT:  SCTE&VT, OdishaNotable union government schools in the city include
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bhubaneshwar
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar (; Odia: [ˈbʱubɔneswɔɾɔ, -ɕwɔɾ] (listen)) is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Odisha.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar and Cuttack are often referred to as the 'twin cities of Odisha'.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar and Rourkela are the two cities in smart city mission from Odisha.
# SENT:  Because of this, on 30 September 1946, a proposal to move the capital to a new capital was introduced in the Legislative Assembly of the Odisha Province.
# SENT:  The Legislative Assembly of Odisha was shifted from Cuttack to Bhubaneswar in 1949.
# SENT:  Bhubaneswar is in Khordha district of Odisha.
# SENT:  The 1999 Odisha cyclone caused major damage to buildings, the city's infrastructure and cost many human lives.
# SENT:  According to the Odisha Development Authorities Act, 1982, the Development Authority has control over the planning for municipal areas.
# SENT:  A large number of companies including Odisha State Cooperative Milk Producers' Federation, Bharat Biotech, Topaz Solar, Britannia Industries, SMS Group and Jockey International have there manufacturing plant.In 2009, Odisha was ranked ninth among Indian states in terms of software export by NASSCOM, with most IT/ITES companies established in Bhubaneswar.
# SENT:  In 2011–12, Odisha had a growth rate of 17% for software exports.
# SENT:  As the seat of the Government of Odisha, Bhubaneswar is home to the Odisha Legislative Assembly and the state secretariat.
# SENT:  Electricity is supplied by the state-operated Central Electricity Supply Utility of Odisha.
# SENT:  Fire services are handled by the state agency Odisha Fire Service.
# SENT:  Utkal University Bhubaneswar is the oldest university in Odisha and the 17th oldest university in India.
# SENT:  BSE, Odisha
# SENT:  CHSE, Odisha
# SENT:  SCTE&VT, OdishaNotable union government schools in the city include
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:24, WORD1_SENTS:27, WORD2_SENTS:44
# WORDPAIR: Doha Qatar
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qatar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geography_of_Qatar
# SENT:  Qatar is a peninsula in the east of Arabia, bordering the Persian Gulf and Saudi Arabia, in a strategic location near major petroleum deposits.
# SENT:  The State of Qatar occupies 11,437 km2 (4,416 sq mi) on a peninsula that extends approximately to 160 km (99 mi) north into the Persian Gulf from the Arabian Peninsula.Varying in width between 55 and 90 km (34 and 56 mi), the land is mainly flat (the highest point is 103 m (338 ft)) and rocky.
# SENT:  The peninsula of Qatar is low-lying.
# SENT:  Its shape is the surface expression of the Qatar Arch, one of the largest structural characteristics of the Arabian Plate.
# SENT:  Hill ranges (called 'jebels') can be found in western Qatar near the Dukhan area and at Jebel Fuwayrit on the northeast coast.
# SENT:  Inland sabkhas can be found in western in Qatar near Dukhan and Sawda Natheel.A sabkha (salt-flat) ecosystem known as the Dukhan Sabkha is found in the northern section of the Dukhan region in western Qatar.
# SENT:  It also accommodates the lowest point of Qatar, at six meters below sea level.
# SENT:  There are 21 species of mammals that have been recorded in Qatar.
# SENT:  The Arabian gazelle is the only native gazelle species to Qatar and is locally referred to as 'rheem'.Qatar's territorial waters in the Persian Gulf are rich in marine life.
# SENT:  In the course of a study being carried out in 1986 and 1999 on the Persian Gulf, the largest-ever group sightings were made of more than 600 individuals to the west of Qatar.
# SENT:  Qatar has one land border.
# SENT:  Qatar's northwest coast is fewer than 30 km (19 mi) from the main islands of Bahrain, while the small Hawar Islands of Bahrain are only 1.4 km (0.8 mi) off that coast.
# SENT:  Of the islands belonging to Qatar, Halul is the most important.
# SENT:  Lying about 90 km (56 mi) east of Doha, it serves as a storage area and loading terminal for oil from the surrounding offshore fields.
# SENT:  Hawar and the adjacent islands immediately off the west coast are the subject of a territorial dispute between Qatar and Bahrain.
# SENT:  Most  of Qatar's surface lies on Cenozoic strata.
# SENT:  The northern zone of Qatar, which comprises the most significant source of fresh groundwater in the peninsula, primarily draws its water from the Umm Err Radhuma Formation and Rus Formation dating to the Paleocene and Lower Eocene periods, respectively.
# SENT:  The capital, Doha, is located on the central east coast on a sweeping (if shallow) harbor.
# SENT:  Only Doha and Umm Said are capable of handling commercial shipping, although a large port and a terminal for loading natural gas are planned at Ras Laffan Industrial City, north of Al Khawr.
# SENT:  Coral reefs and shallow coastal waters make navigation difficult in areas where channels have not been dredged.Doha is the capital of the country and the major administrative, commercial, and population center.
# SENT:  Doha's international airport has an approximately 4,500 m (14,800 ft) main runway, capable of receiving all kinds of aircraft.Historically, settlement distribution in Qatar has mainly been dictated by the presence of obtainable fresh groundwater.
# SENT:  In Qatar's south, where groundwater is exceedingly difficult to obtain, settlement formation was mostly limited to wadis (dry river valleys) fed by run-off from nearby hills and rawdas.
# SENT:  Casey, Paula; Vine, Peter (1991).
# SENT:  The heritage of Qatar (print ed.).
# SENT:  "East of Qatar".
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Qatar
# SENT:  The history of Qatar spans from its first duration of human occupation to its formation as a modern state.
# SENT:  Human occupation of Qatar dates back to 50,000 years ago, and Stone Age encampments and tools have been unearthed in the Arabian Peninsula.
# SENT:  After the Bani Utbah and other Arab tribes conquered Bahrain in 1783, the Al Khalifa imposed their authority over Bahrain and mainland Qatar.
# SENT:  Over the following centuries, Qatar was a site of contention between the Wahhabi of Najd and the Al Khalifa.
# SENT:  In 1916, Qatar became a British protectorate and Abdullah Al Thani signed a treaty stipulating that he could only cede territory to the British in return for protection from all aggression by sea and support in case of a land attack.
# SENT:  In 1935, a 75-year oil concession was granted to QatarEnergy and high-quality oil was discovered in 1940 in Dukhan.During the 1950s and 1960s, increasing oil revenues brought prosperity, rapid immigration, substantial social progress, and the beginnings of the country's modern history.
# SENT:  After Britain announced a policy of ending the treaty relationships with the Persian Gulf sheikdoms in 1968, Qatar joined the other eight states then under British protection in a plan to form a federation of Arab emirates.
# SENT:  Accordingly, Qatar declared its independence on September 3, 1971.
# SENT:  Macrolithic tools such as scrapers, arrowheads and hand axes dating to the lower and middle paleolithic periods were among the discoveries.The flooding of the Persian Gulf, which occurred roughly 8,000 years ago, resulted in the displacement of Persian Gulf inhabitants, the formation of the Qatari Peninsula and the occupation of Qatar to capitalize on its coastal resources.
# SENT:  From this time onward, Qatar was regularly used as rangeland for nomadic tribes from the Najd and al-Hasa regions in Saudi Arabia, and a number of seasonal encampments were constructed around sources of water.
# SENT:  Al Da'asa, a settlement located on the northeast coast of Qatar, is the most extensive Ubaid site in the country.
# SENT:  The Qatari Peninsula was close enough to the Dilmun civilization in Bahrain to have felt its influence.
# SENT:  Barbar pottery was excavated in two sites by the Qatar Archaeology Project, evidencing the country's involvement in Dilmun's trade network.
# SENT:  When the people of Dilmun began engaging in maritime activities around 2100 to 1700 BC, the inhabitants of Qatar started diving for pearls in the Persian Gulf.
# SENT:  The Qataris were engaged in the trading of pearls and date palms during this era.It has been argued that the remains of Dilmun settlements found in Qatar do not represent major evidence of long-term human habitation.
# SENT:  Qatar remained largely uninhabited during this period due to regular migration by nomadic Arab tribes searching for untapped sources food and water.
# SENT:  It has also been suggested that the presence of pottery is indicative of trade between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Dilmun civilization, though this is considered unlikely due to the scarce population of the peninsula during this period.Kassite Babylonian-influenced materials dating back to the second millennium BC, which were found in Al Khor Island, reveal evidence of trade relations between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Kassite.
# SENT:  It has been asserted that Qatar was the site of the earliest known production of shellfish dye owing to a purple dye industry operated by the Kassite which existed on the island.
# SENT:  Assyrian king Esarhaddon led a successful campaign against Bazu, an area which encompassed Dilmun and Qatar, in c. 680 BC.
# SENT:  This is likely due to adverse climatic changes rendering Qatar less inhabitable during this period.In the 5th century BC, Greek historian Herodotus published the earliest known description of the population of Qatar, describing its inhabitants as 'sea-faring Canaanites'.
# SENT:  Archaeological evidence of Greek-influenced materials has been discovered in Qatar.
# SENT:  Pottery recovered from expeditions in Qatar has demonstrated links to the Parthian Empire.Ras Abrouq, a coastal city north of Dukhan, housed a fishing station which foreign vessels used to dry fish in 140 BC.
# SENT:  Qatar played a role in the commercial activity of the Sasanids, contributing to at least two commodities: precious pearls and purple dye.
# SENT:  Sasanid pottery and glassware were found in Mezru'ah, a city north-west of Doha, and fragments of glassware and pottery were discovered in a settlement in Umm al-Ma'a.Under the Sasanid reign, many of the inhabitants in Eastern Arabia were introduced to Christianity after the religion was dispersed eastward by Mesopotamian Christians.
# SENT:  Monasteries were constructed in Qatar during this era, and further settlements were founded.
# SENT:  During the latter part of the Christian era, Qatar was known by the Syriac name 'Beth Qatraye' (ܒܝܬ ܩܛܪܝܐ; "region of the Qataris").
# SENT:  The region was not limited to Qatar; it also included Bahrain, Tarout Island, Al-Khatt, and Al-Hasa.
# SENT:  Munzir obliged his request and most Arab tribes in Qatar converted to Islam.
# SENT:  It has been proposed by historian Habibur Rahman that Munzir ibn Sawa's seat of administration existed in the Murwab or Umm al-Ma'a area of Qatar.
# SENT:  After the adoption of Islam, the Arabs led the Muslim conquest of Persia which resulted in the fall of the Sasanian Empire.It is likely that some settled populations in Qatar did not immediately convert to Islam.
# SENT:  Until the late eighteenth century, all of the principal towns of Qatar including Al Huwaila, Fuwayrit, Al Bidda and Doha were situated on the east coast.
# SENT:  Doha developed around the largest of these, Al Bidda.
# SENT:  As punishment for piracy committed by the inhabitants of Doha, an East India Company vessel bombarded the town in 1821.
# SENT:  Doha was ruled by the Al-Buainain tribe.
# SENT:  The Al-Buainain tribe revolted, provoking the Al Khalifa to destroy their fort and expel them from Doha.
# SENT:  The expulsion of the Al-Buainain granted the Al Khalifa more jurisdiction over Doha.
# SENT:  Consequently, the Bahrainis attempted to drive away residents of Al Bidda and Doha who were suspected of being loyal to the Wahhabi by imposing an economic blockade on the inhabitants which prevented them from engaging in pearl hunting.
# SENT:  A British record later stated: "(...) the towns of Doha and Wakrah were, at the end of 1867 temporarily blotted out of existence, the houses being dismantled and the inhabitants deported."
# SENT:  Fearing that he would face death or imprisonment, Jassim bin Mohammed moved to Al Wajbah (10 miles west of Doha); he was accompanied by several tribe members.
# SENT:  Some few years ago his father was engaged in hostilities with the Turks, who succeeded, after some hard fighting, in establishing a garrison in the fort of Al Bida’ (Dohah) on the eastern side of the peninsula and in reducing Jasim to nominal subjection.
# SENT:  When Ahmad bin Ali issued the formal announcement from his Swiss villa instead of from his palace in Doha, many Qataris were convinced that it was time for a change in leadership.
# SENT:  In March 2005, a suicide bombing killed a British teacher at the Doha Players Theatre, shocking the country, which had not previously experienced acts of terrorism.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Politics_of_Qatar
# SENT:  Qatari officials have also indicated a willingness to allow alcohol in "fan zones" at the 2022 FIFA World Cup.Until recently, restaurants on the Pearl-Qatar (a man-made island near Doha) were allowed to serve alcoholic drinks.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture_of_Qatar
# SENT:  The image is now displayed prominently on buildings, in media and in art in Qatar.At the 2022 Doha Forum, Qatar Museum's Chairperson, Sheikha Al Mayassa bint Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, revealed plans for a further three museums: The first, the Art Mill, located on the site of a historic flour mill, a centre designed by Alejandro Aravena of Elemental, will accommodate presentation facilities for artistic media and for present day art, as well as spaces for educational activities and internship programs, workrooms, a centre for the cultural industries of Qatar, the Dhow Centre, as well as gardens.
# SENT:  The multinational media conglomerate Al Jazeera Media Network is based in Doha with its wide variety of channels of which Al Jazeera Arabic, Al Jazeera English, Al Jazeera Documentary Channel, Al Jazeera Mubasher, beIN Sports Arabia and AlrayyanTV with other operations are based in the TV Roundabout in the city.
# SENT:  
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doha_(disambiguation)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cities_in_Qatar
# SENT:  Over 60 percent of residents of Qatar live in Doha, the capital.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy_of_Qatar
# SENT:  That said, there is considerable optimism that Qatar's bourse, the Doha Securities Market (DSM), will remain relatively resilient to the ongoing international turbulence.
# SENT:  Other niche tourism segments receiving special focus include cultural tourism on the back of the high publicity opening of Doha's Museum of Islamic Art, and sports tourism, initially spurred by the Asian Games, to which Qatar played host in 2006.
# SENT:  Project highlights in this segment include the multibillion-dollar Doha Expressway and the Qatar Bahrain Causeway, which will connect Qatar to Bahrain and Saudi Arabia and is considered a milestone in regional interconnectivity.
# SENT:  Mass-transit options, such as a Doha metro, light-rail system and more extensive bus networks, are also under development to ease road congestion.
# SENT:  The New Doha International Airport is one of the largest projects in Qatar today and will boast a capacity of 50m passengers upon completion in 2015.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Religion_in_Qatar
# SENT:  The Abdulla Bin Zaid Al Mahmoud Islamic Cultural Center is located in the Al Souq neighbourhood of Doha, adjacent to Souq Waqif.
# SENT:  In May 2005, the Qatari Government leased a piece of property on the outskirts of Doha to the representatives of Christian churches in the country for the construction of Church buildings.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Education_in_Qatar
# SENT:  Several prestigious universities from around the world have satellite campuses in the country in Education City and within suburbs of the capital Doha.
# SENT:  They were found only in large urban settlements, such as Doha, and were attended by children of wealthy families.
# SENT:  In 1949, the country's first formal school was established in Doha by the emir of Qatar under the name Islah al-Mohammadiyeh.
# SENT:  The city's second school was established in 1954.Soon after the establishment of the country's first school in Doha, schools began their expansion into other settlements.
# SENT:  The first formal girls' school opened its doors in 1955 in Doha.In 1956, the Ministry of Education was founded, marking the beginning of several educational initiatives on a national scale.
# SENT:  However, this initiative was halted as a result of large-scale domestic emigration to Doha in the following years.
# SENT:  In the 1970s, the government initiated a policy of re-locating village inhabitants to larger nearby settlements where they then established co-educational primary and secondary schools.There were four major school administrative zones by the early 1990s: Al Shamal (north Qatar), Doha, Al Khor (north-east Qatar), and Dukhan (west Qatar).
# SENT:  These schools (and curricula) include Qatar Academy (IB World School), Doha College (UK curriculum), American School of Doha, The Gulf English School (UK / IB curriculum), Doha Academy, Doha English Speaking School (UK primary curriculum), The International School of Choueifat, The Cambridge School, Dukhan English School, Park House English School, Compass International School, Qatar International School (UK Curriculum for England), MES Indian School and Ideal Indian School (CBSE), English Modern School, Philippine School Doha, Pearling Season International School, Stafford Sri Lankan School Doha, Middle East International School, Sherborne Qatar (UK curriculum) and Mesaieed International School.
# SENT:  To meet the needs of Non-Arabic speaking expatriate children, Pak Shama School, a Pakistani community school was the first ever expatriate school opened in 1964 in Old Doha City, off AlAsmakh Street, opened by Edward Sardar and his wife (a Christian family from Sialkot district, Pakistan).
# SENT:  PEC is the first expatriate school, got school land in Abu Hamour District of Doha as gift from then ruler of State of Qatar Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad AlThani.
# SENT:  The first edition was held in Doha in November 2009.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Retailing_in_Qatar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_rights_in_Qatar
# SENT:  Qatari officials have also indicated a willingness to allow alcohol in "fan zones" at the 2022 FIFA World Cup.Up until December 2011, restaurants on the Pearl-Qatar (a man-made island near Doha) were allowed to serve alcoholic drinks, but they were then told to stop selling alcohol.
# SENT:  To promote more awareness in this area, the Ritz-Carlton Doha, created the World's largest Cake for the QFCHT Sculpture.
# SENT:  The overall cost of the project is estimated at around $1.1 billion and will be an integrated city in the Industrial area of Doha.
# SENT:  This does not apply to special sponsorship of a Qatar Financial Center-sponsored worker, where it is encouraged and regulated that sponsorship should be uninhibited and assistance should be given to allow for such transfers of sponsorship.In May 2014, Ali bin Samikh al-Marri, Chairman of Qatar's National Human Rights Committee (NHRC), said that Doha had officially announced the end of the current sponsorship system, and had passed a new law replacing it with a new one in which contracts are signed between the workers and their employers.
# SENT:  According to Najeeb al-Nuaimi, a criminal lawyer and former justice minister of Qatar, many women are able to avoid or be released from prison by marrying the father of their baby, at which point the woman is allowed to leave the country with her husband.In October 2020, several women who were boarding flights from Doha were taken away to undergo invasive gynaecological examinations, after an abandoned newborn baby had been found in the airport toilets and officials were searching for the mother in order to punish her.
# SENT:  The Doha edition of The New York Times International Edition had large empty areas in the newspaper with a note that the offending articles had been "exceptionally removed".
# SENT:  For example, in March 2008 the Roman Catholic church Our Lady of the Rosary was consecrated in Doha.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_relations_of_Qatar
# SENT:  Diplomatic missions to Qatar are based in its capital, Doha.
# SENT:  Doha reported it as false and gave no indication on where it originated.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:20, WORD1_SENTS:30, WORD2_SENTS:49
# WORDPAIR: Riga Latvia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riga
# SENT:  Riga (; Latvian: Rīga [ˈriːɡa] (listen), Livonian: Rīgõ) is the capital and largest city of Latvia and is home to 605,802 inhabitants which is a third of Latvia's population.
# SENT:  The city lies on the Gulf of Riga at the mouth of the Daugava river where it meets the Baltic Sea.
# SENT:  Riga's territory covers 307.17 km2 (118.60 sq mi) and lies 1–10 m (3.3–32.8 ft) above sea level, on a flat and sandy plain.Riga was founded in 1201 and is a former Hanseatic League member.
# SENT:  Riga's historical centre is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, noted for its Art Nouveau/Jugendstil architecture and 19th century wooden architecture.
# SENT:  Riga was the European Capital of Culture in 2014, along with Umeå in Sweden.
# SENT:  Riga hosted the 2006 NATO Summit, the Eurovision Song Contest 2003, the 2006 IIHF Men's World Ice Hockey Championships, 2013 World Women's Curling Championship and the 2021 IIHF World Championship.
# SENT:  In 2016, Riga received over 1.4 million visitors.
# SENT:  The city is served by Riga International Airport, the largest and busiest airport in the Baltic states.
# SENT:  Riga is a member of Eurocities, the Union of the Baltic Cities (UBC) and Union of Capitals of the European Union (UCEU).
# SENT:  There are numerous and speculative theories for the origin of the name Riga:
# SENT:  Bishop Albert claimed credit from his campaign to conquer and convert the local populace, as coming from the Latin rigata ("irrigated"), symbolising an "irrigation of dry pagan souls by Christianity".However, the most reliably documented explanation is the affirmation by German historian Dionysius Fabricius (1610) that Riga's name comes from its already established role in trade: "Riga nomen sortita est suum ab aedificiis vel horreis quorum a litus Dunae magna fuit copia, quas livones sua lingua Rias vocare soliti."
# SENT:  (in Latin) ("Riga obtained its name from the buildings or warehouses found in great number along the banks of the Duna, which the Livs in their own language are accustomed to call Riae.").
# SENT:  The "j" in Latvian rīja hardened to a "g" in German.
# SENT:  English geographer Richard Hakluyt (1589) corroborates this account, calling Riga Rie, as pronounced in Latvian.
# SENT:  A sheltered natural harbour 15 km (9.3 mi) upriver from the mouth of the Daugava—the site of today's Riga—has been recorded, as Duna Urbs, as early as the 2nd century.
# SENT:  Riga began to develop as a centre of Viking trade during the early Middle Ages.
# SENT:  Riga's inhabitants occupied themselves mainly with fishing, animal husbandry, and trading, later developing crafts (in bone, wood, amber, and iron).The Livonian Chronicle of Henry testifies to Riga having long been a trading centre by the 12th century, referring to it as portus antiquus (ancient port), and describes dwellings and warehouses used to store mostly flax, and hides.
# SENT:  German traders began visiting Riga, establishing a nearby outpost in 1158.
# SENT:  Catholic and Orthodox Christianity had already arrived in Latvia more than a century earlier, and many Latvians had been baptised.
# SENT:  Meinhard settled among the Livs, building a castle and church at Uexküll (now known as Ikšķile), upstream from Riga, and established his bishopric there.
# SENT:  Albert landed in Riga in 1200 with 23 ships and 500 Westphalian crusaders.
# SENT:  In 1201, he transferred the seat of the Livonian bishopric from Uexküll to Riga, extorting agreement to do this from the elders of Riga by force.
# SENT:  To promote a permanent military presence, territorial ownership was divided between the Church and the Order, with the Church taking Riga and two-thirds of all lands conquered and granting the Order a third.
# SENT:  Until then, it had been customary for crusaders to serve for a year and then return home.Albert had ensured Riga's commercial future by obtaining papal bulls which decreed that all German merchants had to carry on their Baltic trade through Riga.
# SENT:  In 1211, Riga minted its first coinage, and Albert laid the cornerstone for the Riga Dom.
# SENT:  Riga was not yet secure as an alliance of tribes failed to take Riga.
# SENT:  Polotsk conceded Kukenois (Koknese) and Jersika to Albert, also ending the Livs' tribute to Polotsk.Riga's merchant citizenry chafed and sought greater autonomy from the Church.
# SENT:  In 1221, they acquired the right to independently self-administer Riga and adopted a city constitution.That same year Albert was compelled to recognise Danish rule over lands they had conquered in Estonia and Livonia.
# SENT:  Albert had sought the aid of King Valdemar of Denmark to protect Riga and Livonian lands against Liv insurrection when reinforcements could not reach Riga.
# SENT:  Albert was able to reach an accommodation with them a year later, however, and in 1222 Valdemar returned all Livonian lands and possessions to Albert's control.Albert's difficulties with Riga's citizenry continued; with papal intervention, a settlement was reached in 1225 whereby they no longer had to pay tax to the Bishop of Riga, and Riga's citizens acquired the right to elect their magistrates and town councillors.
# SENT:  In 1226, Albert consecrated the Dom Cathedral, built St. James's Church, (now a cathedral) and founded a parochial school at the Church of St. George.In 1227, Albert conquered Oesel and the city of Riga concluded a treaty with the Principality of Smolensk giving Polotsk to Riga.Albert died in January 1229.
# SENT:  In 1282, Riga became a member of the Hanseatic League.
# SENT:  The Hansa was instrumental in giving Riga economic and political stability, thus providing the city with a strong foundation which endured the political conflagrations that were to come, down to modern times.
# SENT:  As the influence of the Hanseatic League waned, Riga became the object of foreign military, political, religious and economic aspirations.
# SENT:  Riga accepted the Reformation in 1522, ending the power of the archbishops.
# SENT:  With the demise of the Livonian Order during the Livonian War, Riga for twenty years had the status of a free imperial city of the Holy Roman Empire before it came under the influence of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth by the Treaty of Drohiczyn, which ended the war for Riga in 1581.
# SENT:  In 1621, during the Polish–Swedish War (1621–1625), Riga and the outlying fortress of Daugavgrīva came under the rule of Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, who intervened in the Thirty Years' War not only for political and economic gain but also in favour of German Lutheran Protestantism.
# SENT:  During the Russo-Swedish War (1656–1658), Riga withstood a siege by Russian forces.
# SENT:  Riga remained one of the largest cities under the Swedish crown until 1710, a period during which the city retained a great deal of autonomous self-government.
# SENT:  Between November 1709 and June 1710, however, the Russians under Tsar Peter the Great besieged and captured Riga, which was at the time struck by a plague.
# SENT:  Along with the other Livonian towns and gentry, Riga capitulated to Russia, but largely retained their privileges.
# SENT:  Riga was made the capital of the Governorate of Riga (later, Livonia).
# SENT:  At the beginning of the 20th century Riga was the largest timber export port in the Russian Empire and ranked the 3rd according to the external trade volume.
# SENT:  During these many centuries of war and changes of power in the Baltic, and despite demographic changes, the Baltic Germans in Riga had maintained a dominant position.
# SENT:  By 1867, Riga's population was 42.9% German.
# SENT:  Riga employed German as its official language of administration until the installation of Russian in 1891 as the official language in the Baltic provinces, as part of the policy of Russification of the non-Russian-speaking territories of the Russian Empire, including Congress Poland, Finland and the Baltics, undertaken by Tsar Alexander III.
# SENT:  More and more Latvians started moving to the city during the mid-19th century.
# SENT:  The rise of a Latvian bourgeoisie made Riga a centre of the Latvian National Awakening with the founding of the Riga Latvian Association in 1868 and the organisation of the first national song festival in 1873.
# SENT:  The nationalist movement of the Neo-Latvians was followed by the socialist New Current during the city's rapid industrialisation, culminating in the 1905 Revolution led by the Latvian Social Democratic Workers' Party.
# SENT:  The 20th century brought World War I and the impact of the Russian Revolution of 1917 to Riga.
# SENT:  As a result of the battle of Jugla, the German army marched into Riga on 3 September 1917.
# SENT:  Because of the armistice with Germany of 11 November 1918, Germany had to renounce that treaty, as did Russia, leaving Latvia and the other Baltic States in a position to claim independence.
# SENT:  Latvia, with Riga as its capital city, thus declared its independence on 18 November 1918.
# SENT:  Between World War I and World War II (1918–1940), Riga and Latvia shifted their focus from Russia to the countries of Western Europe.
# SENT:  The United Kingdom and Germany replaced Russia as Latvia's major trade partners.
# SENT:  The majority of the Baltic Germans were resettled in late 1939, prior to the occupation of Estonia and Latvia by the Soviet Union in June 1940.
# SENT:  During World War II, Latvia was occupied by the Soviet Union in June 1940 and then was occupied by Nazi Germany in 1941–1944.
# SENT:  On 17 June 1940, the Soviet forces invaded Latvia occupying bridges, post/telephone, telegraph, and broadcasting offices.
# SENT:  Three days later, Latvian president Karlis Ulmanis was forced to approve a pro-Soviet government which had taken office.
# SENT:  On 14–15 July, rigged elections were held in Latvia and the other Baltic states, The ballots held the following instructions: "Only the list of the Latvian Working People's Bloc must be deposited in the ballot box.
# SENT:  The Soviet authorities, having regained control over Riga and Latvia imposed a regime of terror, opening the headquarters of the KGB, massive deportations started.
# SENT:  Hundreds of men were arrested, including leaders of the former Latvian government.
# SENT:  The most notorious deportation, the June deportation took place on 13 and 14 June 1941, estimated at 15,600 men, women, and children, and including 20% of Latvia's last legal government.
# SENT:  Stalin's deportations also included thousands of Latvian Jews.
# SENT:  Most of Latvia's Jews (about 24,000) were killed on 30 November and 8 December 1941 in the Rumbula massacre.
# SENT:  In 1989, the percentage of Latvians in Riga had fallen to 36.5%.
# SENT:  Latvian President Andris Bērziņš described the disaster as "a large-scale murder of many defenceless people".Riga was the European Capital of Culture in 2014.
# SENT:  During Latvia's Presidency of the Council of the European Union in 2015, the 4th Eastern Partnership Summit took place in Riga.
# SENT:  Riga is the second largest city (after Vilnius) in the three Baltic states: Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.
# SENT:  With 605,800 inhabitants in 2022 as according to the Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia, Riga was the largest city in the Baltic states, though its population has decreased from just over 900,000 in 1991 and the population of Vilnius has just outnumbered that of Riga.
# SENT:  According to the 2022 data, ethnic Latvians made up 47.4% of the population of Riga.
# SENT:  By comparison, 63.0% of Latvia's total population was ethnically Latvian, 24.2% Russian, 3.1% Belarusian, 2.2% Ukrainian, 1.9% Polish, 1.1% are Lithuanian and the rest of other origins.
# SENT:  Upon the restoration of Latvia's independence in 1991, Soviet-era immigrants (and any of their offspring born before 1991) were not automatically granted Latvian citizenship because they had migrated to the territory of Latvia during the years when Latvia was part of the Soviet Union.
# SENT:  The proportion of ethnic Latvians in Riga increased from 36.5% in 1989 to 47.4% in 2022.
# SENT:  In 2022 citizens of Latvia made up 79.0%, non-citizens 15.3% and citizens of other countries 5.6% of the population of Riga.
# SENT:  Roughly half of all the jobs in Latvia are in Riga and the city generates more than 50% of Latvia's GDP as well as around half of Latvia's exports.
# SENT:  (Russian: «Мы ближе, чем Швейцария!») On 28 July 1995, twenty Latvian banks with assistance of persons from the Paris Stock Exchange organised the Riga Stock Exchange which was the first Latvian stock exchange in Riga.
# SENT:  The Latvian National Opera was founded in 1918.
# SENT:  The Latvian National Opera is famous not only for its operas, but for its ballet troupe as well.
# SENT:  The Latvian National Theatre was founded in 1919.
# SENT:  The Latvian National Theatre preserves the traditions of Latvian drama school.
# SENT:  It is one of the biggest theatres in Latvia.
# SENT:  The Mikhail Chekhov Riga Russian Theatre is the oldest professional drama theatre in Latvia, established in 1883.
# SENT:  It is one of the most successful theatres in Latvia and is distinguished by its frequent productions of modern foreign plays.
# SENT:  Latvian State Puppet Theatre was founded in 1944 and presents shows for children and adults.
# SENT:  The radio and TV tower of Riga is the tallest structure in Latvia and the Baltic States, and one of the tallest in the European Union, reaching 368.5 m (1,209 ft).
# SENT:  BK VEF Rīga – a professional basketball team that is a three-time Latvian champion.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Riga
# SENT:  The history of Riga, the capital of Latvia, begins as early as the 2nd century with a settlement, the Duna urbs, at a natural harbor not far upriver from the mouth of the Daugava River.
# SENT:  Christianity had come to Latvia as early as the 9th century, but it was the arrival of the Crusades at the end of the 12th century which brought the Germans and forcible conversion to Christianity; the German hegemony instituted over the Baltics lasted until independence—and is still preserved today in Riga's Jugendstil (German Art Nouveau) architecture.
# SENT:  From the 13th century to the birth of nationalism in the 19th and independence in the 20th, Latvia's and Riga's history are intertwined, a chronicle of the rise and fall of surrounding foreign powers over the Latvians and their territory.
# SENT:  Today, Riga and its environs are home to close to half of Latvia's inhabitants.
# SENT:  It was subsequently settled by the Livs, an ancient Finnic tribe who had arrived during the 5th and 6th centuries, about the same time that Riga began to develop as a center of Viking trade during the early Middle Ages.Archeological digs at the sites of Riga Town Hall (Albert) Square (Latvian: Rātslaukums) and at the corner of Peldu and Ūdensvada streets offer glimpses into Riga's residents of the 12th century.
# SENT:  The evidence is conclusive, however, that Riga owes its name to its already-established role in commerce between East and West, as a borrowing of the Latvian rija, for warehouse, the "y" sound of the "j" later transcribed and hardened in German to a "g"—most notably, Riga is named Rie (no "g") in English geographer Richard Hakluyt's 1589 The Principal Navigations, and the origin of Riga from rija is confirmed by the German historian Dionysius Fabricius (1610): "Riga nomen sortita est suum ab aedificiis vel horreis quorum a litus Dunae magna fuit copia, quas livones sua lingua Rias vocare soliti."
# SENT:  Christianity had established itself in Latvia more than a century earlier: Catholicism in western Latvia, with a church built in 1045 by Danish merchants, but arriving as early as 870 with the Swedes; Orthodox Christianity being brought to central and eastern Latvia by missionaries.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:24, WORD1_SENTS:44, WORD2_SENTS:26
# WORDPAIR: USA Dollar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_dollar
# SENT:  The United States dollar (symbol: $; code: USD; also abbreviated US$ or U.S. Dollar, to distinguish it from other dollar-denominated currencies; referred to as the dollar, U.S. dollar, American dollar, or colloquially buck) is the official currency of the United States and several other countries.
# SENT:  "Dollar" is one of the first words of Section 9, in which the term refers to the Spanish milled dollar, or the coin worth eight Spanish reales.
# SENT:  In 1792, the U.S. Congress passed the Coinage Act, of which Section 9 authorized the production of various coins, including:: 248 Dollars or Units—each to be of the value of a Spanish milled dollar as the same is now current, and to contain three hundred and seventy-one grains and four sixteenth parts of a grain of pure, or four hundred and sixteen grains of standard silver.Section 20 of the Act designates the United States dollar as the unit of currency of the United States:: 250–1 [T]he money of account of the United States shall be expressed in dollars, or units…and that all accounts in the public offices and all proceedings in the courts of the United States shall be kept and had in conformity to this regulation.
# SENT:  Dollars in general have also been known as bones (e.g.
# SENT:  The symbol $, usually written before the numerical amount, is used for the U.S. dollar (as well as for many other currencies).
# SENT:  The last coins to be converted to profiles of historic Americans were the dime (1946) and the Dollar (1971).
# SENT:  The U.S. Dollar Index is an important indicator of the dollar's strength or weakness versus a basket of six foreign currencies.
# SENT:  For a more exhaustive discussion of countries using the U.S. dollar as official or customary currency, or using currencies which are pegged to the U.S. dollar, see International use of the U.S. dollar#Dollarization and fixed exchange rates and Currency substitution#US dollar.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_United_States_dollar
# SENT:  However, there was a provision in the act allowing some coins to contain a 40% silver consistency, such as the Kennedy Half Dollar.
# SENT:  The security thread glows green under ultraviolet light, and "USA TWENTY" and a flag are printed on the thread, while the numeral "20" is printed within the star field of the flag.
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_dollar
# SENT:  The United States dollar (symbol: $; code: USD; also abbreviated US$ or U.S. Dollar, to distinguish it from other dollar-denominated currencies; referred to as the dollar, U.S. dollar, American dollar, or colloquially buck) is the official currency of the United States and several other countries.
# SENT:  "Dollar" is one of the first words of Section 9, in which the term refers to the Spanish milled dollar, or the coin worth eight Spanish reales.
# SENT:  In 1792, the U.S. Congress passed the Coinage Act, of which Section 9 authorized the production of various coins, including:: 248 Dollars or Units—each to be of the value of a Spanish milled dollar as the same is now current, and to contain three hundred and seventy-one grains and four sixteenth parts of a grain of pure, or four hundred and sixteen grains of standard silver.Section 20 of the Act designates the United States dollar as the unit of currency of the United States:: 250–1 [T]he money of account of the United States shall be expressed in dollars, or units…and that all accounts in the public offices and all proceedings in the courts of the United States shall be kept and had in conformity to this regulation.
# SENT:  Dollars in general have also been known as bones (e.g.
# SENT:  The symbol $, usually written before the numerical amount, is used for the U.S. dollar (as well as for many other currencies).
# SENT:  The last coins to be converted to profiles of historic Americans were the dime (1946) and the Dollar (1971).
# SENT:  The U.S. Dollar Index is an important indicator of the dollar's strength or weakness versus a basket of six foreign currencies.
# SENT:  For a more exhaustive discussion of countries using the U.S. dollar as official or customary currency, or using currencies which are pegged to the U.S. dollar, see International use of the U.S. dollar#Dollarization and fixed exchange rates and Currency substitution#US dollar.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dollar
# SENT:  Dollar is the name of more than 20 currencies.
# SENT:  Others include the Australian dollar, Brunei dollar, Canadian dollar, Eastern Caribbean dollar, Hong Kong dollar, Jamaican dollar, Liberian dollar, Namibian dollar, New Taiwan dollar, New Zealand dollar, Singapore dollar, Trinidad and Tobago Dollar and several others.
# SENT:  Malaysia: the Malaysian ringgit used to be called the "Malaysian Dollar".
# SENT:  It is closely related to the dollars (Spanish dollar was used in USA until 1857) and euros used today.
# PAGE:  https://hif.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_dollar
# SENT:  The United States dollar (symbol: $; code: USD; also abbreviated US$ or U.S. Dollar, to distinguish it from other dollar-denominated currencies; referred to as the dollar, U.S. dollar, American dollar, or colloquially buck) is the official currency of the United States and several other countries.
# SENT:  "Dollar" is one of the first words of Section 9, in which the term refers to the Spanish milled dollar, or the coin worth eight Spanish reales.
# SENT:  In 1792, the U.S. Congress passed the Coinage Act, of which Section 9 authorized the production of various coins, including:: 248 Dollars or Units—each to be of the value of a Spanish milled dollar as the same is now current, and to contain three hundred and seventy-one grains and four sixteenth parts of a grain of pure, or four hundred and sixteen grains of standard silver.Section 20 of the Act designates the United States dollar as the unit of currency of the United States:: 250–1 [T]he money of account of the United States shall be expressed in dollars, or units…and that all accounts in the public offices and all proceedings in the courts of the United States shall be kept and had in conformity to this regulation.
# SENT:  Dollars in general have also been known as bones (e.g.
# SENT:  The symbol $, usually written before the numerical amount, is used for the U.S. dollar (as well as for many other currencies).
# SENT:  The last coins to be converted to profiles of historic Americans were the dime (1946) and the Dollar (1971).
# SENT:  The U.S. Dollar Index is an important indicator of the dollar's strength or weakness versus a basket of six foreign currencies.
# SENT:  For a more exhaustive discussion of countries using the U.S. dollar as official or customary currency, or using currencies which are pegged to the U.S. dollar, see International use of the U.S. dollar#Dollarization and fixed exchange rates and Currency substitution#US dollar.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banknotes_of_the_United_States_dollar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_one-dollar_bill
# SENT:  Thus they are very common.Dollar Bills with interesting serial numbers can also be collected.
# SENT:  The One Dollar Bill, Zoomable and Annotated
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coins_of_the_United_States_dollar
# SENT:  The Quarter-Dollar, Half-Dollar and Dollar coins were issued in the copper 91.67% nickel 8.33% composition for general circulation and the Government issued six-coin Proof Set.
# SENT:  The Presidential Dollar series features portraits of all deceased U.S. Presidents with four coin designs issued each year in the order of the president's inauguration date.
# SENT:  Likewise, the double eagle was specifically created as such by name ("An Act to authorize the Coinage of Gold Dollars and Double Eagles", title and section 1, March 3, 1849).
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:United_States_dollar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_denominations_of_United_States_currency
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dollar_coin_(United_States)
# SENT:  Dollar coins have been minted in the United States in gold, silver, and base metal versions.
# SENT:  Dollar coins were first minted  in the United States in 1794.
# SENT:  Dollar coins have never been popular in circulation since inception.
# SENT:  The American trade dollar therefore had to be made better, at 420 grains of 90% fine silver, fine content 378.0 grains (24.49 g), or 0.44 g more fine silver than the regular circulation Seated Liberty Dollars and Morgan Dollars.
# SENT:  Production of the Morgan Dollar began again in 2021 and US Mint officials announced an intention to continue producing them in 2022 and beyond.
# SENT:  However, this coin, much like the 1933 $20 gold double eagle (aside from the "exception", sold in 2002 for over $7 million and the 10 found later), is illegal to own and would be subject to confiscation.Minting of the Peace Dollar began again in 2021.
# SENT:  US Mint officials have announced an intention to continue minting Peace Dollars in 2022 and beyond.
# SENT:  From 1979 to 1981, and again in 1999, the Mint produced Anthony Dollars depicting women's suffrage activist Susan B. Anthony (also designed by Frank Gasparro).
# SENT:  Dollar coins are used infrequently in general commerce.
# SENT:  Like the Presidential Dollar, the year of issue, mint mark, and motto E Pluribus Unum are found on the edge of the coin instead of on the obverse or reverse, which allows for more room for the design.
# SENT:  In December 2005, Congress decided to create a new series of $1 coins that would honor the former U.S. presidents.
# SENT:  On July 20, 2018, then-President Donald Trump signed the American Innovation $1 Coin Act into law.
# SENT:  The Comprehensive U. S. Silver Dollar Encyclopedia by John W. Highfill, ISBN 0-9629900-0-0
# SENT:  Comprehensive Catalog and Encyclopedia of Morgan and Peace Dollars, ISBN 978-0-9660168-2-6
# SENT:  "Dollar coin series will feature presidents".
# SENT:  USA Today.
# SENT:  United States Dollar Coins, Varieties and Reference
# SENT:  United States Small Size Dollar Coins, 1979–present
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_use_of_the_U.S._dollar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_one-hundred-dollar_bill
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/?title=U.S._dollar&redirect=no
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dollar_sign
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_American_Dollar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U.S._Dollar_Index
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Coins_of_the_United_States_dollar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk%3AUnited_States_dollar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australian_dollar
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_standard
# WORDPAIR: Kabul Afghanistan
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabul
# SENT:  Kabul (; کابل; Pashto: [kɑˈbəl]; Dari: [kɑːˈbʊl]) is the capital and largest city of Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Located in the eastern half of the country, it is also a municipality, forming part of the Kabul Province; it is administratively divided into 22 municipal districts.
# SENT:  According to late 2022 estimates, the population of Kabul was 13.5 million people.
# SENT:  In contemporary times, the city has served as Afghanistan's political, cultural, and economical centre, and rapid urbanisation has made Kabul the 75th-largest city in the world and the country's primate city.
# SENT:  The modern-day city of Kabul is located high up in a narrow valley between the Hindu Kush, and is bounded by the Kabul River.
# SENT:  Kabul is said to be over 3,500 years old, mentioned since at least the time of the Achaemenid Persian Empire.
# SENT:  Kabul has also been under the rule of various other dynasties and empires, including the Seleucids, the Kushans, the Hindu Shahis, Western Turks, the Turk Shahis, the Samanids, the Khwarazmians, the Timurids, and the Mongols, among others.
# SENT:  In the 16th century, the Mughal Empire used Kabul as a summer capital, during which time it prospered and increased in significance.
# SENT:  It briefly came under the control of the Afsharids following Nader Shah's invasion of India, until finally becoming coming under local rule by the Afghan Empire in 1747; Kabul became the capital of Afghanistan in 1776, during the reign of Timur Shah Durrani (a son of Ahmad Shah Durrani).
# SENT:  In the 19th century, the city was occupied by the British, but after establishing foreign relations and agreements, they were compelled to withdraw all forces from Afghanistan and returned to British India.
# SENT:  Kabul is known for its historical gardens, bazaars, and palaces; well-known examples are the Gardens of Babur and Darul Aman Palace, as well as the Arg.
# SENT:  In 1996, Kabul was captured by the Taliban after four years of intermittent fighting with other Afghan factions.
# SENT:  However, the Taliban-ruled city soon fell to the United States after the American-led invasion of Afghanistan in 2001.
# SENT:  In 2021, Kabul was re-captured by the Taliban following the withdrawal of American-led military forces from Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Kabul (, ; Pashto: کابل Kâbəl, IPA: [kɑˈbəl]; Dari: کابل Kābol, IPA: [kɒːˈbol]) is also spelled as Cabool, Cabol, Kabol, or Cabul.
# SENT:  Kabul was known by different names throughout history.
# SENT:  The name "Kabul" was first applied to the Kabul river before being applied to the area situated between the Hindu Kush and Sindh (present-day Pakistan).
# SENT:  This area was also known as Kabulistan.
# SENT:  This "supposition seems likely" as the Afghan historian Mir Ghulam Mohammad Ghobar (1898–1978) wrote that in the Avesta (sacred book of Zoroastrianism), Kabul was known as Vaekereta, whereas the Greeks of antiquity referred to it as Ortospana ("High Place"), which corresponds to the Sanskrit word Urddhastana, which was applied to Kabul.
# SENT:  The Greek geographer Ptolemy (died c. 170 CE) recorded Kabul as Καβουρα (Kabura).According to a legend, one could find a lake in Kabul, in the middle of which the so-called "Island of Happiness" could be found, where a joyous family of musicians lived.
# SENT:  According to this legend the name Kabul was thus formed as a result of these two words combined, i.e.
# SENT:  The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Place Names argues that the "suggestion that the name is derived from the Arabic root qbl ‘meeting’ or ‘receiving’ is unlikely".It remains unknown when the name "Kabul" was first applied to the city.
# SENT:  However, it "came into prominence" following the destruction of Kapisa and other cities in what is present-day Afghanistan by Genghis Khan (c. 1162–1227) in the thirteenth century.
# SENT:  Due to the centrality of the city within the region, as well as its cultural importance as a nexus of ethnic groups in the region, Kabul became known as the Paris of Central Asia in the late 20th century.
# SENT:  The origin of Kabul, who built it and when, is largely unknown.
# SENT:  The Hindu Rigveda, composed between 2000 and 1500 BC and one of the four canonical texts of Hinduism, and the Avesta, the primary canon of texts of Zoroastrianism, refer to the Kabul River and to a settlement called Kubha.The Kabul valley was part of the Median Empire (c. 678–549 BC).
# SENT:  In 549 BC, the Median Empire was annexed by Cyrus The Great and Kabul became part the Achaemenid Empire (c. 550–330 BC).
# SENT:  During that period, Kabul became a center of learning for Zoroastrianism, followed by Buddhism and Hinduism.
# SENT:  An inscription on Darius the Great's tombstone lists Kabul as one of the 29 countries of the Achaemenid Empire.
# SENT:  When Alexander annexed the Achaemenid Empire, the Kabul region came under his control.
# SENT:  People were also employed as artisans, jewellers, and carpenters.The Greco-Bactrians took control of Kabul from the Mauryans in the early 2nd century BC, then lost the city to their subordinates in the Indo-Greek Kingdom around the mid-2nd century BC.
# SENT:  Hsuan Tsang refers to the city as Kaofu in the 7th century AD, which is the appellation of one of the five tribes of the Yuezhi who had migrated from across the Hindu Kush into the Kabul valley around the beginning of the Christian era.
# SENT:  Kapol in the Persian language means Royal (ka) Bridge (pol), which is due to the main bridge on the Kabul River that connected the east and west of the city.
# SENT:  In 420 AD, the Indo-Sassanids were driven out of Afghanistan by the Xionite tribe known as the Kidarites, who were then replaced in the 460s by the Hephthalites.
# SENT:  It became part of the surviving Turk Shahi Kingdom of Kapisa, also known as Kabul-Shahan.
# SENT:  According to Táríkhu-l Hind by Al-Biruni, Kabul was governed by princes of Turkic lineage.|Abu Rayhan Biruni|978–1048 AD}} It was briefly held by the Tibetan Empire between 801 and 815.
# SENT:  The Islamic conquest reached modern-day Afghanistan in 642 AD, at a time when Kabul was independent.
# SENT:  In one of them, Abdur Rahman bin Samara arrived in Kabul from Zaranj in the late 600s and converted 12,000 inhabitants to Islam before abandoning the city.
# SENT:  Muslims were a minority until Ya'qub bin Laith as-Saffar of Zaranj conquered Kabul in 870 and established the first Islamic dynasty in the region.
# SENT:  It was reported that the rulers of Kabul were Muslims with non-Muslims living close by.
# SENT:  As a result, many natives of Afghanistan fled south toward the Indian subcontinent where some established dynasties in Delhi.
# SENT:  Following the era of the Khalji dynasty in 1333, the famous Moroccan scholar Ibn Battuta was visiting Kabul and wrote: 
# SENT:  We travelled on to Kabul, formerly a vast town, the site of which is now occupied by a village inhabited by a tribe of Persians called Afghans.
# SENT:  In the 14th century, Kabul became a major trading centre under the kingdom of Timur (Tamerlane).
# SENT:  In 1525, Babur described Kabulistan in his memoirs by writing that:
# SENT:  Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, a poet from Hindustan who visited at the time wrote: "Dine and drink in Kabul: it is mountain, desert, city, river and all else."
# SENT:  Babur loved Kabul due to the fact that he lived in it for 20 years and the people were loyal to him, including the weather that he was used to.
# SENT:  His wish to be buried in Kabul was finally granted.
# SENT:  )Kabul remained in Mughal control for the next 200 years.
# SENT:  Though Mughal power became centred within the Indian subcontinent, Kabul retained importance as a frontier city for the empire; Abul Fazl, Emperor Akbar's chronicler, described it as one of the two gates to Hindustan (the other being Kandahar).
# SENT:  As part of administrative reforms under Akbar, the city was made capital of the eponymous Mughal province, Kabul Subah.
# SENT:  Under Mughal governance, Kabul became a prosperous urban centre, endowed with bazaars such as the non-extant Char Chatta.
# SENT:  For the first time in its history, Kabul served as a mint centre, producing gold and silver Mughal coins up to the reign of Alamgir II.
# SENT:  Kabul was also a recreational retreat for the Mughals, who hunted here and constructed several gardens.
# SENT:  During this time, the population was about 60,000.Under later Mughal Emperors, Kabul became neglected.
# SENT:  His ascension to power marked the beginning of Afghanistan.
# SENT:  In 1919, after the Third Anglo-Afghan War, King Amanullah Khan announced Afghanistan's independence in foreign affairs at Eidgah Mosque in Kabul.
# SENT:  The throne was left to his 19-year-old son, Zahir Shah, who became the last King of Afghanistan.
# SENT:  In 1955, the Soviet Union forwarded $100 million in credit to Afghanistan, which financed public transportation, airports, a cement factory, mechanised bakery, a five-lane highway from Kabul to the Soviet border and dams, including the Salang Pass to the north of Kabul.
# SENT:  Ambassador to Afghanistan, Adolph Dubs, was kidnapped on his way to work at the U.S. Embassy in Kabul on 14 February 1979 and killed during a rescue attempt at the Serena Hotel.
# SENT:  On 24 December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and Kabul was heavily occupied by Soviet Armed Forces.
# SENT:  In Pakistan, Director-General of the ISI Akhtar Abdur Rahman advocated for the idea of covert operation in Afghanistan by arming Islamic extremists who formed the mujahideen.
# SENT:  ", and mastered the idea of proxy war in Afghanistan.
# SENT:  On 27 September 1996, the hardline Taliban militia seized Kabul and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.
# SENT:  In the meantime, a NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was deployed in Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Sunny conditions dominate year-round, and the annual mean temperature is only 12.1 °C (53.8 °F), much lower than that of Afghanistan's other large cities.
# SENT:  Hundreds of non-Muslims still remain after the Taliban retakeover Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Like other provincial municipalities in Afghanistan, the municipality of Kabul dealt with city affairs such as construction and infrastructure.
# SENT:  Over the last decade, the United States has invested approximately $9.1 billion into urban infrastructure in Afghanistan.
# SENT:  According to Transparency International, the government of Afghanistan was the third most-corrupt in the world, as of 2010.
# SENT:  This also prevented foreign investment in Afghanistan, especially by Western countries.
# SENT:  In 2012, there were reportedly $3.9 billion paid to public officials in bribes which contributed to these issues.Da Afghanistan Bank, the nation's central bank, was headquartered in Kabul.
# SENT:  In addition, there are several commercial banks in the city.Each year about 20,000 foreign tourists visited Afghanistan.
# SENT:  In Kabul, Minister Amir Zai Sangin of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology maintained statistics regarding telecommunications in the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Afghanistan Information Management Services (AIMS) provided software development, capacity development, information management, and project management services to the Afghan Government and other NGOs, thereby supporting their on-the-ground activities.
# SENT:  Cultural sites included: the National Museum of Afghanistan, notably displaying an impressive statue of Surya excavated at Khair Khana, the ruined Darul Aman Palace, the tomb of Mughal Emperor Babur at Bagh-e Babur, and Chihil Sutun Park, the Minar-i-Istiqlal (Column of Independence) built in 1919 after the Third Afghan War, the tomb of Timur Shah Durrani, the Bagh-e Bala Palace and the imposing Id Gah Mosque (founded 1893).
# SENT:  Other places of interest include Kabul City Center, which was Kabul's first shopping mall, the shops around Flower Street and Chicken Street, Wazir Akbar Khan district, Kabul Golf Club, Kabul Zoo, Abdul Rahman Mosque, Shah-Do Shamshira and other famous mosques, the National Gallery of Afghanistan, the National Archives of Afghanistan, Afghan Royal Family Mausoleum, the OMAR Mine Museum, Bibi Mahro Hill, Kabul Cemetery, and Paghman Gardens best known for the famous Taq-e Zafar arch.
# SENT:  The decline of cinema of Afghanistan since the 1990s, both due to war and oppressive regimes, had meant many of these have closed.
# SENT:  Kabul's various architectural designs reflected the various links it has had with empires and civilisations, particularly being on the ancient trade route connecting India and China with Persia and the West.The Buddhist Chakari minaret was likely built in the Kushan era and had traces of Greco-Bactrian and Gandhara Art.
# SENT:  The present Gardens of Babur also reflect Afghanistan's traditional architecture by the wooden carving, pressed stucco, decorative stone masonry and other features.
# SENT:  It was a hub to Ariana Afghan Airlines, the national carrier of Afghanistan, as well as private airlines such as Afghan Jet International, East Horizon Airlines, Kam Air, Pamir Airways, and Safi Airways.
# SENT:  The AH77 highway went west towards Bamiyan Province (150 km (93 mi) away) and Chaghcharan in the central mountains of Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Despite the Taliban take-over, D-Agree will continue to play an important role in facilitating urban planning and infrastructure-related consultations.In 2022, United Nations reported that D-Agree Afghanistan is used as a digital and smart city solutions in Afghanistan.D-Agree, is a discussion support platform with artificial intelligence–based facilitation.
# SENT:  The Ministry of Education led by Ghulam Farooq Wardak was responsible for the education system in Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Health care in Afghanistan was relatively poor.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afghanistan
# SENT:  Afghanistan, officially the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, is a landlocked country located at the crossroads of Central Asia and South Asia.
# SENT:  Human habitation in Afghanistan dates back to the Middle Paleolithic era, and the country's strategic location along the historic Silk Road has led it to being described, picturesquely, as the ‘roundabout of the ancient world’.
# SENT:  Afghanistan also served as the source from which the Greco-Bactrians and the Mughals, among others, rose to form major empires.
# SENT:  The various conquests and periods in both the Iranian and Indian cultural spheres made the area a center for Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Hinduism, and later Islam throughout history.The modern state of Afghanistan began with the Durrani dynasty in the 18th century, with the Durrani Afghan Empire being formed by Ahmad Shah Durrani.
# SENT:  Afghanistan would be reunited in the 19th century after 70 years of civil war from 1793–1863, with wars of unification led by Dost Mohammad Khan from 1823-1863, where he conquered the independent principalities in Afghanistan under the Emirate of Kabul.
# SENT:  Dost Mohammad died in 1863, days after his last campaign to unite Afghanistan, and as a result, threw Afghanistan back into civil war with his successors.
# SENT:  During this time, Afghanistan became a buffer state in the Great Game between the British Empire (in British-ruled India) and the Russian Empire.
# SENT:  From India, the British attempted to subjugate Afghanistan but were repelled in the First Anglo-Afghan War.
# SENT:  However, the Second Anglo-Afghan War saw a British victory and the successful establishment of British political influence over Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Following the Third Anglo-Afghan War in 1919, Afghanistan became free of foreign political hegemony, and emerged as the independent Kingdom of Afghanistan in June 1926 under Amanullah Khan.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:17, WORD1_SENTS:45, WORD2_SENTS:33
# WORDPAIR: Denmark krone
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danish_krone
# SENT:  The krone (Danish pronunciation: [ˈkʰʁoːnə]; plural: kroner; sign: kr.
# SENT:  ; code: DKK) is the official currency of Denmark, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands, introduced on 1 January 1875.
# SENT:  The currency is sometimes referred to as the Danish crown in English, since krone literally means crown.
# SENT:  Historically, krone coins have been minted in Denmark since the 17th century.
# SENT:  One krone is subdivided into 100 øre (Danish pronunciation: [ˈøːɐ]; singular and plural), the name øre is probably derived from the Latin word for gold.
# SENT:  Altogether there are eleven denominations of the krone, with the smallest being the 50 øre coin (one half of a krone).
# SENT:  The krone is pegged to the euro via the ERM II, the European Union's exchange rate mechanism.
# SENT:  Adoption of the euro is favoured by some of the major political parties; however, a 2000 referendum on joining the Eurozone was defeated with 53.2% voting to maintain the krone and 46.8% voting to join the Eurozone.
# SENT:  Organised minting in Denmark was introduced on a larger scale by Canute the Great in the 1020s.
# SENT:  Lund (now in Sweden) was the principal minting place and one of Denmark's most important cities in the Middle Ages, but coins were also minted in Roskilde, Slagelse, Odense, Aalborg, Århus, Viborg, Ribe, Ørbæk and Hedeby.
# SENT:  Danish currency was overhauled several times in attempts to restore public trust in the coins, and later issued in paper money.Several different currency systems have been used by Denmark from the 16th to 19th centuries.
# SENT:  The krone (lit.
# SENT:  In more general use until 1813, however, was a krone or schlecht daler worth 2⁄3 rigsdaler, 4 marks, or 64 skilling.The modern-day krone was introduced as the currency of Denmark in January 1875.
# SENT:  It replaced the rigsdaler at a rate of 2 kroner = 1 rigsdaler.
# SENT:  This placed the krone on the gold standard at a rate of 2,480 kroner = 1 kilogram fine gold.
# SENT:  Consequently, banknotes were increasingly used instead of coins.The introduction of the new krone was a result of the Scandinavian Monetary Union, which came into effect in 1873 (with the coins being adopted two years later) and lasted until World War I.
# SENT:  The parties to the union were the three Scandinavian countries, where the name was krone in Denmark and Norway and krona in Sweden, a word which in all three languages literally means ‘crown’.
# SENT:  The three currencies were on the gold standard, with the krone/krona defined as 1⁄2480 of a kilogram of pure gold.The Scandinavian Monetary Union came to an end in 1914 when the gold standard was abandoned.
# SENT:  Denmark, Sweden and Norway all decided to keep the names of their respective and now separate currencies.Denmark returned to the gold standard in 1924 but left it permanently in 1931.
# SENT:  Between 1940 and 1945, the krone was tied to the German Reichsmark.
# SENT:  Following the end of the German occupation, a rate of 24 kroner to the British pound was introduced, reduced to 19.34 (4.8 kroner = 1 US dollar) in August the same year.
# SENT:  Within the Bretton Woods System, Denmark devalued its currency with the pound in 1949 to a rate of 6.91 to the dollar.
# SENT:  A further devaluation in 1967 resulted in rates of 7.5 kroner.In 2014, it was decided to stop printing of the krone in Denmark, but the work would be outsourced, and on 20 December 2016, the last notes were printed by the National Bank.
# SENT:  Denmark has not introduced the euro, following a rejection by referendum in 2000, but the Danish krone is pegged closely to the euro (with the rate 7.46038±2.25%) in ERM II, the EU's exchange rate mechanism.
# SENT:  Denmark borders one eurozone member, Germany, and one other EU member, Sweden, which is legally obliged to join the euro in the future (though Sweden maintains that joining ERM II is voluntary, thus avoiding euro adoption for the time being).
# SENT:  The Faroe Islands uses a localized, non-independent version of the Danish krone, known as the Faroese króna pegged with the Danish krone at par, using the Danish coin series, but have their own series of distinct banknotes, first being issued in the 1950s and later modernized in the 1970s and the 2000s.
# SENT:  Still, Greenland continues to use Danish kroner as sole official currency.
# SENT:  Historically, Greenland under the colonial administration issued distinct banknotes between 1803 and 1968, together with coins between 1926 and 1964 (see Greenland rigsdaler and Greenland krone).
# SENT:  Faroe Islands and Greenland have their own IBAN codes (FO and GL, while Denmark has DK).
# SENT:  The 50 øre coins are thus minted from copper-coloured bronze, the 1, 2 and 5 krone coins from a silver-coloured cupronickel alloy, and the 10 and 20 krone coins from golden aluminium bronze.
# SENT:  The 50 øre and 10 krone coins have smooth rims, while the rims of the 1 and 5 krone coins are milled.
# SENT:  The rims of the 2 and 20 krone coins have interrupted milling.
# SENT:  The 1, 2 and 5 krone coins have a hole in the middle.
# SENT:  The first series, 20-krone coins featuring towers in Denmark, ran between 2002 and 2007 and spawned ten different motifs.
# SENT:  Upon selecting the towers, importance had been attached not only to display aesthetic towers, but also towers with different form, functions and from different regions of Denmark, the Faroe Islands and Greenland.
# SENT:  A second series of 20-krone coins, starting in 2007 with twelve different planned motifs and ten already released by November 2011, shows Denmark as a maritime nation in the world, featuring iconic Danish, Faroese and Greenlandic ships and like the previous series of tower coins, the series reflect various landmarks in shipbuilding in the three countries.
# SENT:  In 2005, Danmarks Nationalbank issued the first in a series of five 10-krone commemorative coins with motifs from Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tales.
# SENT:  In 2007, as the fairy tale series ended, a second series of three 10-krone commemorative coins was introduced, celebrating the International Polar Year.
# SENT:  Banknotes have since 1945 been issued with the values: 5 kroner, 10 kroner, 20 kroner, 50 kroner, 100 kroner, 200 kroner, 500 kroner & 1000 kroner.
# SENT:  Danish artist Karin Birgitte Lund has chosen to interpret this theme in two ways: bridges as links between various parts of Denmark and as links between the past and the present.
# SENT:  Within context, some of the banknotes have figurative meanings with the 100-krone note sometimes referred to as a hund (dog) shortening the word hundrede (a hundred).
# SENT:  The 500-krone note can be referred to as a plovmand (ploughman) because previous circulations of the note featured a picture of a man with a plough and the 1000-krone note, too, can be referred to as a tudse (toad) taken from a wordplay on the word tusinde meaning a thousand.
# SENT:  The 1000-krone note may also be referred to as an egern (squirrel) because the 1972 series version of the note featured a squirrel.
# SENT:  Royal Mint of Denmark see Denmark's coin series.
# SENT:  Historical and current banknotes of Denmark
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danish_krone
# SENT:  The krone (Danish pronunciation: [ˈkʰʁoːnə]; plural: kroner; sign: kr.
# SENT:  ; code: DKK) is the official currency of Denmark, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands, introduced on 1 January 1875.
# SENT:  The currency is sometimes referred to as the Danish crown in English, since krone literally means crown.
# SENT:  Historically, krone coins have been minted in Denmark since the 17th century.
# SENT:  One krone is subdivided into 100 øre (Danish pronunciation: [ˈøːɐ]; singular and plural), the name øre is probably derived from the Latin word for gold.
# SENT:  Altogether there are eleven denominations of the krone, with the smallest being the 50 øre coin (one half of a krone).
# SENT:  The krone is pegged to the euro via the ERM II, the European Union's exchange rate mechanism.
# SENT:  Adoption of the euro is favoured by some of the major political parties; however, a 2000 referendum on joining the Eurozone was defeated with 53.2% voting to maintain the krone and 46.8% voting to join the Eurozone.
# SENT:  Organised minting in Denmark was introduced on a larger scale by Canute the Great in the 1020s.
# SENT:  Lund (now in Sweden) was the principal minting place and one of Denmark's most important cities in the Middle Ages, but coins were also minted in Roskilde, Slagelse, Odense, Aalborg, Århus, Viborg, Ribe, Ørbæk and Hedeby.
# SENT:  Danish currency was overhauled several times in attempts to restore public trust in the coins, and later issued in paper money.Several different currency systems have been used by Denmark from the 16th to 19th centuries.
# SENT:  The krone (lit.
# SENT:  In more general use until 1813, however, was a krone or schlecht daler worth 2⁄3 rigsdaler, 4 marks, or 64 skilling.The modern-day krone was introduced as the currency of Denmark in January 1875.
# SENT:  It replaced the rigsdaler at a rate of 2 kroner = 1 rigsdaler.
# SENT:  This placed the krone on the gold standard at a rate of 2,480 kroner = 1 kilogram fine gold.
# SENT:  Consequently, banknotes were increasingly used instead of coins.The introduction of the new krone was a result of the Scandinavian Monetary Union, which came into effect in 1873 (with the coins being adopted two years later) and lasted until World War I.
# SENT:  The parties to the union were the three Scandinavian countries, where the name was krone in Denmark and Norway and krona in Sweden, a word which in all three languages literally means ‘crown’.
# SENT:  The three currencies were on the gold standard, with the krone/krona defined as 1⁄2480 of a kilogram of pure gold.The Scandinavian Monetary Union came to an end in 1914 when the gold standard was abandoned.
# SENT:  Denmark, Sweden and Norway all decided to keep the names of their respective and now separate currencies.Denmark returned to the gold standard in 1924 but left it permanently in 1931.
# SENT:  Between 1940 and 1945, the krone was tied to the German Reichsmark.
# SENT:  Following the end of the German occupation, a rate of 24 kroner to the British pound was introduced, reduced to 19.34 (4.8 kroner = 1 US dollar) in August the same year.
# SENT:  Within the Bretton Woods System, Denmark devalued its currency with the pound in 1949 to a rate of 6.91 to the dollar.
# SENT:  A further devaluation in 1967 resulted in rates of 7.5 kroner.In 2014, it was decided to stop printing of the krone in Denmark, but the work would be outsourced, and on 20 December 2016, the last notes were printed by the National Bank.
# SENT:  Denmark has not introduced the euro, following a rejection by referendum in 2000, but the Danish krone is pegged closely to the euro (with the rate 7.46038±2.25%) in ERM II, the EU's exchange rate mechanism.
# SENT:  Denmark borders one eurozone member, Germany, and one other EU member, Sweden, which is legally obliged to join the euro in the future (though Sweden maintains that joining ERM II is voluntary, thus avoiding euro adoption for the time being).
# SENT:  Faroe Islands and Greenland have their own IBAN codes (FO and GL, while Denmark has DK).
# SENT:  The first series, 20-krone coins featuring towers in Denmark, ran between 2002 and 2007 and spawned ten different motifs.
# SENT:  Upon selecting the towers, importance had been attached not only to display aesthetic towers, but also towers with different form, functions and from different regions of Denmark, the Faroe Islands and Greenland.
# SENT:  A second series of 20-krone coins, starting in 2007 with twelve different planned motifs and ten already released by November 2011, shows Denmark as a maritime nation in the world, featuring iconic Danish, Faroese and Greenlandic ships and like the previous series of tower coins, the series reflect various landmarks in shipbuilding in the three countries.
# SENT:  Danish artist Karin Birgitte Lund has chosen to interpret this theme in two ways: bridges as links between various parts of Denmark and as links between the past and the present.
# SENT:  Royal Mint of Denmark see Denmark's coin series.
# SENT:  Historical and current banknotes of Denmark
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krone_(Danish_coin)
# SENT:  The coin featured King Christian IX of Denmark on its obverse, with the inscription KONGE AF DANMARK (King of Denmark).
# SENT:  The reverse featured the coat of arms of Denmark with the denomination written underneath.
# SENT:  The coin was minted in the years 1875, 1876, 1892, and 1898.A second silver krone was minted in 1915 and 1916, with King Christian X of Denmark on the obverse.
# SENT:  This was the first time that a crown (which the coin's name comes from) had been omitted.The portrait of Christian X was replaced by that of the new King Frederick IX of Denmark in 1947.
# SENT:  In 1973, the portrait on the coin was changed to the new queen, Margrethe II of Denmark.
# SENT:  Her inscription was MARGRETHE II DANMARKS DRONNING (Margrethe II Denmark's Queen).
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DKK
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/?title=Danish_Krone&redirect=no
# SENT:  Her version was produced by Thornalley and peaked at number one on the singles charts of Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Spain, and Sweden, as well as on three US Billboard charts.
# SENT:  It became a hit in Denmark.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denmark_and_the_euro
# SENT:  Denmark uses the krone as its currency and does not use the euro, having negotiated the right to opt out from participation under the Maastricht Treaty of 1992.
# SENT:  Many political parties in Denmark favour the introduction of the euro and the idea of a second referendum has even been suggested several times since 2000.
# SENT:  However, following the financial crisis of 2008, support began to fall, and in late 2011, support for the euro crashed in light of the escalating European sovereign debt crisis.Denmark borders one eurozone member, Germany, and one EU member that is obliged to adopt the euro in the future but currently has no plans to do so, Sweden.
# SENT:  The bourgeois coalition government of Denmark in 1992 consisting of Conservatives Agrarian Liberals and the Social democrats held approximately 80% of the seats in the Danish parliament (Folketing) and therefore believed that the referendum would easily get approved which was not the case.The ratification of the Maastricht Treaty needed to be a unanimous decision by all the member states in the EU and the Danish "no" therefore posed a significant issue for the further integration process.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:16, WORD1_SENTS:34, WORD2_SENTS:39
# WORDPAIR: Russia Ruble
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_ruble
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruble
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_ruble
# SENT:  The ruble or rouble (Russian: рубль) was the currency of the Soviet Union, introduced in 1922, replacing the Imperial Russian ruble.
# SENT:  ; also, several forms of virtual rubles (called "cashless ruble", безналичный рубль) were used for inter-enterprise accounting and international settlement in the Comecon zone.In 1991, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Soviet ruble continued to be used in the post-Soviet states, forming a "ruble zone", until it was replaced with the Russian ruble in September 1993.
# SENT:  The word kopeck or copeck  (in Russian: копейка kopeyka) is a diminutive form of the Russian kop'yo (копьё)—a spear.
# SENT:  From the 1540s onwards the horseman bears a crown, and doubtless the intention was to represent Ivan the Terrible, who was Grand Prince of all Russia until 1547, and Tsar thereafter.
# SENT:  The Soviet currency had its own name in all the languages of the Soviet Union, often different from its Russian designation.
# SENT:  This naming is preserved in modern Russia; for example: Tatar for 'ruble' and 'kopeck' are сум (sum) and тиен (tiyen).
# SENT:  The first ruble issued for the Soviet government was a preliminary issue still based on the previous issue of the ruble prior to the Russian Revolution of 1917.
# SENT:  At this time other issues were made by the white Russian government and other governing bodies.
# SENT:  During that time, the Russian economy suffered from hyperinflation.
# SENT:  Coins: The first coinage after the Russian civil war was minted in 1921–1923 according to pre-war Czarist standards, with silver coins of 10 kop, 15 kop, 20 kop minted in 50% silver, 50 kop ("poltinnik" or Rbl 1⁄2) and Rbl 1 in 90% silver, and Rbls 10 (chervonets) in 90% gold.
# SENT:  These coins bore the emblem and legends of the RSFSR (Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic) and depicted the famous slogan, "Workers of the world, Unite!".
# SENT:  In early 1924, just before the next redenomination, the first paper money was issued in the name of the USSR, featuring the state emblem with six bands around the wheat, representing the languages of the then four constituent republics of the Union: Russian SFSR, Transcaucasian SFSR (Azerbaijani, Armenian, and Georgian), Ukrainian SSR and Byelorussian SSR.
# SENT:  In 1967, a commemorative series of 10 kop, 15 kop, 20 kop, 50 kop, and Rbl 1 coins was released, celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Russian Revolution and depicted Lenin and various socialist achievements.
# SENT:  It did, however, continue to be used in several former Soviet republics including Russia and particularly Tajikistan for a short time after the union had ceased to exist out of necessity.
# SENT:  all texts were in Russian only) in the 1992 issues; all 1991 notes (in exception to the 2nd 1991 Rbls 100 banknote) contained all Soviet languages.
# SENT:  After the breakup of the Soviet Union, many newly independent republics chose to continue circulating Soviet rubles even after the introduction of the new Russian ruble in 1992.
# SENT:  Since it was clear that the situation would not last, each of them used their positions as "free-riders" to issue huge amounts of money in the form of credit (since Russia held the monopoly on printing banknotes and coins).
# SENT:  The Russian central bank responded in July 1992 by setting up restrictions on the flow of credit between Russia and other states.
# SENT:  The final collapse of the "ruble zone" began with the exchange of banknotes by the Central Bank of Russia on Russian territory at the end of July 1993.
# SENT:  Leon Trotsky.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruble_sign
# SENT:  The ruble sign, ₽,  is the currency sign used for the Russian ruble, the official currency of Russia.
# SENT:  The design was approved on 11 December 2013 after a public poll that took place a month earlier.In Russian orthography, the sign almost always follows the number (the monetary value), and in many cases there is a space between the two.
# SENT:  In the 18th and 19th centuries there was a symbol for the Russian ruble consisting of lower case Cyrillic letters — a rotated р on a у.
# SENT:  The debates about adopting a national currency symbol for the Russian ruble began nearly from the start of Russia's transition to a market economy and its economic integration into the global market in the 1990s, soon after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
# SENT:  However, the Central Bank of Russia did not adopt one of the winning symbols from these early contests.
# SENT:  In 2007, a group of Russian design bureaus and studios proposed to use ₽, the stroked Cyrillic letter Р to represent the ruble.
# SENT:  In November 2013, the Central Bank of Russia finally decided to adopt a national currency sign.
# SENT:  On 11 December 2013, ₽ was approved as the official sign for the Russian Federation's ruble.
# SENT:  It can be entered on a Russian computer keyboard as AltGr+8 on Windows and Linux, or AltGr+Р (Qwerty ⌥+H position) on macOS.
# SENT:  The cryptocurrency Petro, backed by government of Venezuela, uses the same symbol as the Ruble, although usually with a rounder upper part (  ).
# SENT:  A currency symbol used in the Pokémon media franchise is visually similar to the Ruble sign but instead has two strokes (  ).
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_ruble
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruble_(disambiguation)
# SENT:  The ruble (American English) or rouble (Commonwealth English) (; Russian: рубль, IPA: [rublʲ]) is the currency unit of Belarus and Russia.
# SENT:  Historically, it was the currency of the Russian Empire and of the Soviet Union.
# SENT:  As of 2022, currencies named ruble in circulation include the Belarusian ruble (BYN, Rbl) in Belarus and the Russian ruble (RUB, ₽) in Russia.
# SENT:  Historically, the grivna, ruble and denga were used in Russia as measurements of weight.
# SENT:  The Soviet ruble officially replaced the imperial ruble in 1922 and continued to be used until 1993, when it was formally replaced with the Russian ruble in the Russian Federation and by other currencies in other post-Soviet states.
# SENT:  In the past, several other countries influenced by Russia and the Soviet Union had currency units that were also named ruble, including the Armenian ruble, Latvian ruble and Tajikistani ruble.
# SENT:  According to one version, the word "ruble" is derived from the Russian verb рубить (rubit), "to cut, to chop, to hack", as a ruble was considered a cutout piece of a silver grivna.
# SENT:  Rubles were parts of the grivna or pieces of silver with notches indicating their weight.
# SENT:  The casting of these pieces included some sort of cutting (the exact technology is unknown), hence the name from рубить (rubit).Another version of the word's origin is that it comes from the Russian noun рубец (rubets), the seam that is left around a silver bullions after casting: silver was added to the cast in two steps.
# SENT:  A popular theory deriving the word ruble from rupee is probably not correct.The ruble was the Russian equivalent of the mark, a measurement of weight for silver and gold used in medieval Western Europe.
# SENT:  In Russian, a folk name for ruble, tselkovyj (целковый, IPA: [tsɨlˈkovɨj], wholesome), is known, which is a shortening of the целковый рубль ("tselkovyj ruble"), i.e., a wholesome, uncut ruble.
# SENT:  Since the monetary reform of 1534, one Russian accounting ruble became equivalent to 100 silver Novgorod denga coins or smaller 200 Muscovite denga coins or even smaller 400 polushka coins.
# SENT:  Ruble coins as such did not exist till Peter the Great, when in 1704 he reformed the old monetary system and ordered mintage of a 28 g (0.90 ozt) silver ruble coin equivalent to 100 new copper kopek coins.
# SENT:  The Russian plurals that may be seen on the actual currency are modified according to Russian grammar.
# SENT:  In several languages spoken in Russia and the former Soviet Union, the currency name has no etymological relation with ruble.
# SENT:  Especially in Turkic languages or languages influenced by them, the ruble is often known (also officially) as som or sum (meaning pure), or manat (from Russian moneta, meaning coin).
# SENT:  As the Novgorod denga bore the image of a rider with a spear (Russian: копьё, kop’yo), it later has become known as kopek.
# SENT:  In 1704 Peter the Great finally reformed the old Russian monetary system, minting a silver ruble coin of weight 28.1 g (0.90 ozt) and 72% fineness; hence 20.22 g fine silver.
# SENT:  The decision to subdivide it primarily into 100 copper kopeks, rather than 200 Muscovite denga, made the Russian ruble the world's first decimal currency.The amount of silver in a ruble varied in the 18th century.
# SENT:  With the founding of the Soviet Union in 1922, the Russian ruble was replaced by the Soviet ruble.
# SENT:  By the beginning of the 19th century, copper coins were issued for 1⁄4, 1⁄2, 1, 2 and 5 kopeks, with silver 5, 10, 25 and 50 kopeks and 1 ruble and gold 5 although production of the 10 ruble coin ceased in 1806.
# SENT:  The Constantine ruble (Russian: константиновский рубль, konstantinovsky rubl') is a rare silver coin of the Russian Empire bearing the profile of Constantine, the brother of emperors Alexander I and Nicholas I.
# SENT:  In 1843, the Assignation Bank ceased operations, and state credit notes (Russian: государственные кредитные билеты, gosudarstvenniye kreditniye bilety) were introduced in denominations of 1, 3, 5, 10, 25, 50 and 100 rubles.
# SENT:  Ruble (disambiguation) for a more comprehensive directory of past and present currencies called ruble or rouble.
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruble
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modification_of_banknotes_of_the_Russian_ruble_(2022%E2%80%942025)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Russian_ruble
# PAGE:  https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41044
# PAGE:  https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ruble
# PAGE:  https://www.britannica.com/topic/ruble
# PAGE:  https://www.cbr.ru/eng/cash_circulation/
# PAGE:  https://www.pinterest.com/pin/372250725423466493/
# PAGE:  https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:200_rubles_2017_reverse.jpg
# PAGE:  https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/ruble
# PAGE:  https://www.wionews.com/world/russia-imposes-fines-worth-millions-of-rubles-on-wikipedia-over-content-on-ukraine-war-530315
# PAGE:  https://www.investopedia.com/terms/forex/r/rub-russian-ruble.asp
# PAGE:  https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/ruble
# PAGE:  https://www.xe.com/currencycharts/?from=RUB&to=USD
# PAGE:  https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ruble
# WORDPAIR: Slovakia Slovakian
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovakia
# SENT:  Slovakia ( (listen); Slovak: Slovensko [ˈslɔʋenskɔ] (listen)), officially the Slovak Republic (Slovak: Slovenská republika [ˈslɔʋenskaː ˈrepublika] (listen)), is a landlocked country in Central Europe.
# SENT:  Slovakia's mostly mountainous territory spans about 49,000 square kilometres (19,000 sq mi), with a population of over 5.4 million.
# SENT:  The Slavs arrived in the territory of present-day Slovakia in the fifth and sixth centuries.
# SENT:  The area was recovered largely thanks to Béla IV of Hungary, who also settled Germans, leading them to become an important ethnic group in the area, especially in what are today parts of central and eastern Slovakia.After World War I and the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the state of Czechoslovakia was established.
# SENT:  Slovakia became an independent state on 1 January 1993 after the peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia, sometimes known as the Velvet Divorce.
# SENT:  Slovakia is a developed country with an advanced high-income economy, ranking 45th very high in the Human Development Index.
# SENT:  Slovakia is a member of the European Union, the Eurozone, the Schengen Area, the United Nations, NATO, CERN, the OECD, the WTO, the Council of Europe, the Visegrád Group, and the OSCE.
# SENT:  Slovakia is also home to eight UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
# SENT:  The world's largest per-capita car producer, Slovakia manufactured a total of 1.1 million cars in 2019, representing 43% of its total industrial output.
# SENT:  Slovakia's name in theory means the "Land of the Slavs" (Slovensko in Slovak stemming from the older form Sloven/Slovienin).
# SENT:  Most foreign translations tend to stem from this newer form (Slovakia in English, Slowakei in German, Slovaquie in French, etc.).
# SENT:  In German sources, names for the Slovak lands were Windenland or Windische Lande (early 15th century), with the forms "Slovakia" and "Schlowakei" starting to appear in the 16th century.
# SENT:  The oldest surviving human artefacts from Slovakia are found near Nové Mesto nad Váhom and are dated at 270,000 BCE, in the Early Paleolithic era.
# SENT:  These ancient tools, made by the Clactonian technique, bear witness to the ancient habitation of Slovakia.Other stone tools from the Middle Paleolithic era (200,000–80,000 BCE) come from the Prévôt (Prepoštská) cave in Bojnice and from other nearby sites.
# SENT:  The most important discovery from that era is a Neanderthal cranium (c. 200,000 BCE), discovered near Gánovce, a village in northern Slovakia.
# SENT:  During the Bronze Age, the geographical territory of modern-day Slovakia went through three stages of development, stretching from 2000 to 800 BCE.
# SENT:  Major cultural, economic, and political development can be attributed to the significant growth in production of copper, especially in central Slovakia (for example in Špania Dolina) and northwest Slovakia.
# SENT:  During Hallstatt times, monumental burial mounds were erected in western Slovakia, with princely equipment consisting of richly decorated vessels, ornaments and decorations.
# SENT:  The local power of the "Princes" of the Hallstatt period disappeared in Slovakia during the century before the middle of first millennium BC, after strife between the Scytho-Thracian people and locals, resulting in abandonment of the old hill-forts.
# SENT:  From around 500 BCE, the territory of modern-day Slovakia was settled by Celts, who built powerful oppida on the sites of modern-day Bratislava and Devín.
# SENT:  Biatecs, silver coins with inscriptions in the Latin alphabet, represent the first known use of writing in Slovakia.
# SENT:  The Kingdom of Vannius, a kingdom founded by the Germanic Suebi tribes of Quadi and Marcomanni, as well as several small Germanic and Celtic tribes, including the Osi and Cotini, existed in western and central Slovakia from 8–6 BCE to 179 CE.
# SENT:  The Slavic tribes settled in the territory of present-day Slovakia in the fifth century.
# SENT:  Western Slovakia was the centre of Samo's empire in the seventh century.
# SENT:  A Slavic state known as the Principality of Nitra arose in the eighth century and its ruler Pribina had the first known Christian church of the territory of present-day Slovakia consecrated by 828.
# SENT:  During his reign, the Great Moravian Empire reached its greatest territorial extent, when not only present-day Moravia and Slovakia but also present-day northern and central Hungary, Lower Austria, Bohemia, Silesia, Lusatia, southern Poland and northern Serbia belonged to the empire, but the exact borders of his domains are still disputed by modern authors.
# SENT:  Following the disintegration of the Great Moravian Empire at the turn of the tenth century, the Hungarians annexed the territory comprising modern Slovakia.
# SENT:  as evident by large number of loanwords into Hungarian language, concerning primarily economical, agricultural or metallurgy fields.In the years 1001–1002 and 1018–1029, Slovakia was part of the Kingdom of Poland, having been conquered by Boleslaus I the Brave.
# SENT:  After the territory of Slovakia was returned to Hungary, a semi-autonomous polity continued to exist (or was created in 1048 by king Andrew I) called Duchy of Nitra.
# SENT:  Interestingly, in the Hungarian-Polish chronicle from 13th century, the ruler of said duchy, duke Emeric (son of Stephen I of Hungary), is called "Henricus dux Sclavonie", in essence - duke of Slovakia.This polity existed up until 1108/1110, after which it was not restored.
# SENT:  After this, until the year 1918, when the Austro-Hungarian empire collapsed, the territory of Slovakia was an integral part of the Hungarian state.
# SENT:  The ethnic composition of Slovakia became more diverse with the arrival of the Carpathian Germans in the 13th century and the Jews in the 14th century.
# SENT:  However, in medieval times the area of Slovakia was characterised by German and Jewish immigration, burgeoning towns, construction of numerous stone castles, and the cultivation of the arts.
# SENT:  The territory comprising modern Slovakia, then known as Upper Hungary, became the place of settlement for nearly two-thirds of the Magyar nobility fleeing the Turks and became far more linguistically and culturally Hungarian than it was before.
# SENT:  Upper Hungary, modern Slovakia, became the site of frequent wars between Catholics in the west territory and Protestants in the east, as well as against Turks; the frontier was on a constant state of military alert and heavily fortified by castles and citadels often manned by Catholic German and Slovak troops on the Habsburg side.
# SENT:  By 1648, Slovakia was not spared the Counter-Reformation, which brought the majority of its population from Lutheranism back to Roman Catholicism.
# SENT:  In the Austro-Turkish War (1663–1664) a Turkish army led by the Grand Vizier decimated Slovakia.
# SENT:  As the Turks withdrew from Hungary in the late 17th century, the importance of the territory composing modern Slovakia decreased, although Pressburg retained its status as the capital of Hungary until 1848 when it was transferred back to Buda.During the revolution of 1848–49, the Slovaks supported the Austrian Emperor, hoping for independence from the Hungarian part of the Dual Monarchy, but they failed to achieve their aim.
# SENT:  Thereafter relations between the nationalities deteriorated (see Magyarisation), culminating in the secession of Slovakia from Hungary after World War I.
# SENT:  The remaining minorities stepped up their pressures for autonomy and the State became federalised, with Diets in Slovakia and Ruthenia.
# SENT:  The remainder of Czechoslovakia was renamed Czecho-Slovakia and promised a greater degree of Slovak political autonomy.
# SENT:  Parts of southern and eastern Slovakia were also reclaimed by Hungary at the First Vienna Award of November 1938.
# SENT:  After the Munich Agreement and its Vienna Award, Nazi Germany threatened to annex part of Slovakia and allow the remaining regions to be partitioned by Hungary or Poland unless independence was declared.
# SENT:  Thus, Slovakia seceded from Czecho-Slovakia in March 1939 and allied itself, as demanded by Germany, with Hitler's coalition.
# SENT:  As part of the Holocaust in Slovakia, 75,000 Jews out of 80,000 who remained on Slovak territory after Hungary had seized southern regions were deported and taken to German death camps.
# SENT:  Under Tiso's government and Hungarian occupation, the vast majority of Slovakia's pre-war Jewish population (between 75,000 and 105,000 individuals including those who perished from the occupied territory) were murdered.
# SENT:  The territory of Slovakia was liberated by Soviet and Romanian forces by the end of April 1945.
# SENT:  More than 80,000 Hungarians and 32,000 Germans were forced to leave Slovakia, in a series of population transfers initiated by the Allies at the Potsdam Conference.
# SENT:  Out of about 130,000 Carpathian Germans in Slovakia in 1938, by 1947 only some 20,000 remained.
# SENT:  On 17 July 1992, Slovakia, led by Prime Minister Vladimír Mečiar, declared itself a sovereign state, meaning that its laws took precedence over those of the federal government.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovak_Wikipedia
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovak_language
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovak
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovaks
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://sn.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovak_Republic_(1939%E2%80%931945)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Slovaks
# SENT:  Lubos Pastor (1974) – Slovakian-American financial economist, currently the Charles P. McQuaid Professor of Finance at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
# PAGE:  https://hif.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geography_of_Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Government_of_Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Slovakia_before_the_Slovaks
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bratislava
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy_of_Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tourism_in_Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_relations_of_Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Council_(Slovakia)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Politics_of_Slovakia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_Minister_of_Slovakia
# WORDPAIR: Assam Dispur
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dispur
# SENT:  Dispur (, Assamese: [ˈdispuɹ] (listen)) is the capital of the Indian state of Assam and is a suburb of Guwahati.
# SENT:  It became the capital in 1973, when Shillong the erstwhile capital, became the capital of the state of Meghalaya that was carved out of Assam.
# SENT:  Dispur is the seat of power of Government of Assam.
# SENT:  The Assam Secretariat (Janata Bhawan) building is located in Dispur along with the Assam Legislative Assembly House, MLA Hostels and the State Emergency Operations Centre.
# SENT:  The Assam Trunk road and the G S road passes through Dispur.
# SENT:  To the south of Dispur lies the theologically important site of Basistha Ashram and the Shankardev Kalakshetra, a cultural centre created in the 1990s.
# SENT:  Next to Dispur is the township of Jatia.
# SENT:  Dispur, being a part of Guwahati, has warm summers and cold winters.
# SENT:  Monsoon season in Dispur commences from the month of June.
# SENT:  Dispur monsoons are usually accompanied by severe thunderstorms along with heavy downpours.
# SENT:  Dispur is part of Gauhati (Lok Sabha constituency).BJP's Atul Bora is the incumbent MLA of Dispur (Vidhan Sabha constituency).
# PAGE:  https://hi.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E0%A4%A6%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%B8%E0%A4%AA%E0%A5%81%E0%A4%B0
# PAGE:  https://pam.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dispur
# SENT:  Dispur (, Assamese: [ˈdispuɹ] (listen)) is the capital of the Indian state of Assam and is a suburb of Guwahati.
# SENT:  It became the capital in 1973, when Shillong the erstwhile capital, became the capital of the state of Meghalaya that was carved out of Assam.
# SENT:  Dispur is the seat of power of Government of Assam.
# SENT:  The Assam Secretariat (Janata Bhawan) building is located in Dispur along with the Assam Legislative Assembly House, MLA Hostels and the State Emergency Operations Centre.
# SENT:  The Assam Trunk road and the G S road passes through Dispur.
# SENT:  To the south of Dispur lies the theologically important site of Basistha Ashram and the Shankardev Kalakshetra, a cultural centre created in the 1990s.
# SENT:  Next to Dispur is the township of Jatia.
# SENT:  Dispur, being a part of Guwahati, has warm summers and cold winters.
# SENT:  Monsoon season in Dispur commences from the month of June.
# SENT:  Dispur monsoons are usually accompanied by severe thunderstorms along with heavy downpours.
# SENT:  Dispur is part of Gauhati (Lok Sabha constituency).BJP's Atul Bora is the incumbent MLA of Dispur (Vidhan Sabha constituency).
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dispur
# SENT:  Dispur (, Assamese: [ˈdispuɹ] (listen)) is the capital of the Indian state of Assam and is a suburb of Guwahati.
# SENT:  It became the capital in 1973, when Shillong the erstwhile capital, became the capital of the state of Meghalaya that was carved out of Assam.
# SENT:  Dispur is the seat of power of Government of Assam.
# SENT:  The Assam Secretariat (Janata Bhawan) building is located in Dispur along with the Assam Legislative Assembly House, MLA Hostels and the State Emergency Operations Centre.
# SENT:  The Assam Trunk road and the G S road passes through Dispur.
# SENT:  To the south of Dispur lies the theologically important site of Basistha Ashram and the Shankardev Kalakshetra, a cultural centre created in the 1990s.
# SENT:  Next to Dispur is the township of Jatia.
# SENT:  Dispur, being a part of Guwahati, has warm summers and cold winters.
# SENT:  Monsoon season in Dispur commences from the month of June.
# SENT:  Dispur monsoons are usually accompanied by severe thunderstorms along with heavy downpours.
# SENT:  Dispur is part of Gauhati (Lok Sabha constituency).BJP's Atul Bora is the incumbent MLA of Dispur (Vidhan Sabha constituency).
# PAGE:  https://hif.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dispur
# SENT:  Dispur (, Assamese: [ˈdispuɹ] (listen)) is the capital of the Indian state of Assam and is a suburb of Guwahati.
# SENT:  It became the capital in 1973, when Shillong the erstwhile capital, became the capital of the state of Meghalaya that was carved out of Assam.
# SENT:  Dispur is the seat of power of Government of Assam.
# SENT:  The Assam Secretariat (Janata Bhawan) building is located in Dispur along with the Assam Legislative Assembly House, MLA Hostels and the State Emergency Operations Centre.
# SENT:  The Assam Trunk road and the G S road passes through Dispur.
# SENT:  To the south of Dispur lies the theologically important site of Basistha Ashram and the Shankardev Kalakshetra, a cultural centre created in the 1990s.
# SENT:  Next to Dispur is the township of Jatia.
# SENT:  Dispur, being a part of Guwahati, has warm summers and cold winters.
# SENT:  Monsoon season in Dispur commences from the month of June.
# SENT:  Dispur monsoons are usually accompanied by severe thunderstorms along with heavy downpours.
# SENT:  Dispur is part of Gauhati (Lok Sabha constituency).BJP's Atul Bora is the incumbent MLA of Dispur (Vidhan Sabha constituency).
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assam
# PAGE:  https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Dispur
# SENT:  Dispur (, Assamese: [ˈdispuɹ] (listen)) is the capital of the Indian state of Assam and is a suburb of Guwahati.
# SENT:  It became the capital in 1973, when Shillong the erstwhile capital, became the capital of the state of Meghalaya that was carved out of Assam.
# SENT:  Dispur is the seat of power of Government of Assam.
# SENT:  The Assam Secretariat (Janata Bhawan) building is located in Dispur along with the Assam Legislative Assembly House, MLA Hostels and the State Emergency Operations Centre.
# SENT:  The Assam Trunk road and the G S road passes through Dispur.
# SENT:  To the south of Dispur lies the theologically important site of Basistha Ashram and the Shankardev Kalakshetra, a cultural centre created in the 1990s.
# SENT:  Next to Dispur is the township of Jatia.
# SENT:  Dispur, being a part of Guwahati, has warm summers and cold winters.
# SENT:  Monsoon season in Dispur commences from the month of June.
# SENT:  Dispur monsoons are usually accompanied by severe thunderstorms along with heavy downpours.
# SENT:  Dispur is part of Gauhati (Lok Sabha constituency).BJP's Atul Bora is the incumbent MLA of Dispur (Vidhan Sabha constituency).
# PAGE:  https://dbpedia.org/page/Dispur
# SENT:  Dispur (, Assamese: [ˈdispuɹ] (listen)) is the capital of the Indian state of Assam and is a suburb of Guwahati.
# SENT:  It became the capital in 1973, when Shillong the erstwhile capital, became the capital of the state of Meghalaya that was carved out of Assam.
# SENT:  Dispur is the seat of power of Government of Assam.
# SENT:  The Assam Secretariat (Janata Bhawan) building is located in Dispur along with the Assam Legislative Assembly House, MLA Hostels and the State Emergency Operations Centre.
# SENT:  The Assam Trunk road and the G S road passes through Dispur.
# PAGE:  https://assam.gov.in/about-us/394
# PAGE:  https://byjus.com/social-science/capital-of-assam/
# PAGE:  https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Dispur
# SENT:  Dispur (, Assamese: [ˈdispuɹ] (listen)) is the capital of the Indian state of Assam and is a suburb of Guwahati.
# SENT:  It became the capital in 1973, when Shillong the erstwhile capital, became the capital of the state of Meghalaya that was carved out of Assam.
# SENT:  Dispur is the seat of power of Government of Assam.
# SENT:  The Assam Secretariat (Janata Bhawan) building is located in Dispur along with the Assam Legislative Assembly House, MLA Hostels and the State Emergency Operations Centre.
# SENT:  The Assam Trunk road and the G S road passes through Dispur.
# PAGE:  http://wikimapia.org/9622321/Dispur
# SENT:  Dispur (, Assamese: [ˈdispuɹ] (listen)) is the capital of the Indian state of Assam and is a suburb of Guwahati.
# SENT:  It became the capital in 1973, when Shillong the erstwhile capital, became the capital of the state of Meghalaya that was carved out of Assam.
# SENT:  Dispur is the seat of power of Government of Assam.
# SENT:  The Assam Secretariat (Janata Bhawan) building is located in Dispur along with the Assam Legislative Assembly House, MLA Hostels and the State Emergency Operations Centre.
# SENT:  The Assam Trunk road and the G S road passes through Dispur.
# PAGE:  https://www.quora.com/Why-is-Dispur-the-capital-of-Assam-and-not-Guwahati
# SENT:  Assam (; Assamese: [ˈɔxɔm] (listen)) is a state in northeastern India, south of the eastern Himalayas along the Brahmaputra and Barak River valleys.
# SENT:  Assam covers an area of 78,438 km2 (30,285 sq mi).
# SENT:  Assamese and Boro are the official languages of Assam, while Bengali is an additional official language in the Barak Valley.
# SENT:  Assam is known for Assam tea and Assam silk.
# SENT:  Assam is home to the one-horned Indian rhinoceros, along with the wild water buffalo, pygmy hog, tiger and various species of Asiatic birds, and provides one of the last wild habitats for the Asian elephant.
# SENT:  The Assamese economy is aided by wildlife tourism to Kaziranga National Park and Manas National Park, which are World Heritage Sites.
# SENT:  Assam receives more rainfall than most parts of India; this rain feeds the Brahmaputra River, whose tributaries and oxbow lakes provide the region with a distinctive hydro-geomorphic environment.
# SENT:  In the classical period and up to the 12th century, the region east of the Karatoya river, largely congruent to present-day Assam, was called Kamarupa, and alternatively, Pragjyotisha.
# SENT:  Though a western portion of Assam as a region continued to be called Kamrup, the Ahom kingdom that emerged in the east, and which came to dominate the entire Brahmaputra valley, was called Assam (e.g.
# SENT:  Mughals used Asham); and the British province too was called Assam.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:32, WORD1_SENTS:18, WORD2_SENTS:30
# WORDPAIR: Athens Greece
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greece
# SENT:  It also symbolized the sea, which was called the "Very Green".In Ancient Greece, green and blue were sometimes considered the same color, and the same word sometimes described the color of the sea and the color of trees.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classical_Athens
# SENT:  The city of Athens (Ancient Greek: Ἀθῆναι, Athênai [a.tʰɛ̂ː.nai̯]; Modern Greek: Αθήναι, Athine [a.ˈθi.ne̞] or, more commonly and in singular, Αθήνα, Athina [a.
# SENT:  'θi.na]) during the classical period of ancient Greece (480–323 BC) was the major urban centre of the notable polis (city-state) of the same name, located in Attica, Greece, leading the Delian League in the Peloponnesian War against Sparta and the Peloponnesian League.
# SENT:  In the classical period, Athens was a centre for the arts, learning and philosophy, home of Plato's Academy and Aristotle's Lyceum, Athens was also the birthplace of Socrates, Plato, Pericles, Aristophanes, Sophocles, and many other prominent philosophers, writers and politicians of the ancient world.
# SENT:  Hippias, son of Peisistratus, had ruled Athens jointly with his brother, Hipparchus, from the death of Peisistratus in about 527.
# SENT:  The result was democracy in Athens, but considering Cleisthenes' motivation for using the people to gain power, as without their support, he would have been defeated, and so Athenian democracy may be tainted by the fact its creation served greatly the man who created it.
# SENT:  The reforms of Cleisthenes replaced the traditional four Ionic "tribes" (phyle) with ten new ones, named after legendary heroes of Greece and having no class basis, which acted as electorates.
# SENT:  The tribes each selected fifty members by lot for the Boule, the council that governed Athens on a day-to-day basis.
# SENT:  The silver mines of Laurion contributed significantly to the development of Athens in the 5th century BC, when the Athenians learned to prospect, treat, and refine the ore and used the proceeds to build a massive fleet, at the instigation of Themistocles.In 499 BC, Athens sent troops to aid the Ionian Greeks of Asia Minor, who were rebelling against the Persian Empire (see Ionian Revolt).
# SENT:  That provoked two Persian invasions of Greece, both of which were repelled under the leadership of the soldier-statesmen Miltiades and Themistocles (see Persian Wars).
# SENT:  However, that delaying action was not enough to discourage the Persian advance,  which soon marched through Boeotia, setting up Thebes as their base of operations, and entered southern Greece.
# SENT:  That forced the Athenians to evacuate Athens, which was taken by the Persians, and seek the protection of their fleet.
# SENT:  Sparta's hegemony was passing to Athens, and it was Athens that took the war to Asia Minor.
# SENT:  The victories enabled it to bring most of the Aegean and many other parts of Greece together in the Delian League, an Athenian-dominated alliance.
# SENT:  He fostered arts and literature and gave to Athens a splendor which would never return throughout its history.
# SENT:  Resentment by other cities at the hegemony of Athens led to the Peloponnesian War in 431, which pitted Athens and her increasingly rebellious sea empire against a coalition of land-based states led by Sparta.
# SENT:  The war between Athens and the city-state Sparta ended with an Athenian defeat after Sparta started its own navy.
# SENT:  The war ended with the complete defeat of Athens in 404.
# SENT:  Sparta's former allies soon turned against her due to her imperialist policies, and Athens's former enemies, Thebes and Corinth, became her allies.
# SENT:  Argos, Thebes and Corinth, allied with Athens, fought against Sparta in the Corinthian War of 395–387 BC.
# SENT:  In 378, the attempt of the Spartan commander Sphodrias to capture Piraeus by surprise triggered Athens to establish the Second Athenian League.
# SENT:  However, other Greek cities, including Athens, turned against Thebes, and its dominance was brought to an end at the Battle of Mantinea (362 BC) with the death of its leader, the military genius Epaminondas.
# SENT:  By mid century, however, the northern Greek kingdom of Macedon was becoming dominant in Athenian affairs.
# SENT:  In 338 BC the armies of Philip II defeated Athens at the Battle of Chaeronea, effectively  limiting Athenian independence.
# SENT:  During the winter of 338–37 BC Macedonia, Athens and other Greek states became part of the League of Corinth.
# SENT:  Athens remained a wealthy city with a brilliant cultural life, but ceased to be an independent power.
# SENT:  Athens was in Attica, about 30 stadia from the sea, on the southwest slope of Mount Lycabettus, between the small rivers Cephissus to the west, Ilissos to the south, and the Eridanos to the north, the latter of which flowed through the town.
# SENT:  Athens consisted of two distinct parts:
# SENT:  Stoae: or Colonnades, supported by pillars, and used as places of resort in the heat of the day, of which there were several in Athens.
# SENT:  The Outer Kerameikos, northwest of the city, was the finest suburb of Athens; here were buried the Athenians who had fallen in war, and at the further end of it was the Academy, six stadia from the city.
# SENT:  The period from the end of the Persian Wars to the Macedonian conquest marked the zenith of Athens as a center of literature, philosophy (see Greek philosophy) and the arts (see Greek theatre).
# SENT:  Some of the most important figures of Western cultural and intellectual history lived in Athens during this period: the dramatists Aeschylus, Aristophanes, Euripides and Sophocles, the philosophers Aristotle, Plato, and Socrates, the historians Herodotus, Thucydides and Xenophon, the poet Simonides and the sculptor Phidias.
# SENT:  The leading statesman of this period was Pericles, who used the tribute paid by the members of the Delian League to build the Parthenon and other great monuments of classical Athens.
# SENT:  The city became, in Pericles's words, an education for Hellas (usually quoted as "the school of Hellas [Greece].")
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Athens
# SENT:  Athens (Greek: Αθήνα, Athína; Ancient Greek: Αθήναι, Athinai) is the capital of Greece, and also the capital of the Attica periphery.
# SENT:  In addition to being a modern European city, Athens is also famous for being a powerful city-state and a very important center of learning in ancient times.
# SENT:  Drawing on its distinguished history, Athens is a prominent tourist destination.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Athens_metropolitan_area
# SENT:  The Athens metropolitan area (Greek: Μητροπολιτική Περιοχή της Αθήνας) spans 2,928.717 km2 (1,131 sq mi) within the Attica region and consists of 58 municipalities plus areas of East Attica and West Attica, having reached a population of 3,722,544 according to the 2021 census.
# SENT:  Athens and Piraeus municipalities serve as the two metropolitan centres of the Athens metropolitan area.According to the Hellenic Telecommunications and Post Commission, the Athens metropolitan area consists of 
# SENT:  all areas with a dialing code of 21 and includes areas such as Salamina, Elefsina, Mandra, Aspropyrgos, Acharnes, Pallini, Agios Stefanos, Dionysos, Koropi, Vari, Kavouri and the Athens International Airport.
# SENT:  The large city centre of the Greek capital falls directly within the Municipality of Athens.
# SENT:  Athens Municipality is the largest in population size in Greece.
# SENT:  Piraeus also forms a significant city centre on its own within the Athens Urban Area and it is the second largest in population size within it.
# SENT:  The Athens Urban Area, also known as Greater Athens, consists of 40 municipalities, 35 of which make up what was referred to as the former Athens Prefecture municipalities, located within 4 regional units (North Athens, West Athens, Central Athens, South Athens); and a further 5 municipalities, which make up the former Piraeus Prefecture municipalities, located within the regional unit of Piraeus as mentioned above.
# SENT:  The Athens Municipality forms the core and centre of Greater Athens, which in turn consists of the Athens Municipality and 40 more municipalities, divided in four regional units (Central, North, South and West Athens), accounting for 2,597,935 people (in 2021) within an area of 361 km2 (139 sq mi).
# SENT:  Until 2010, which made up the abolished Athens Prefecture and the municipality of Piraeus, the historic Athenian port, with 4 other municipalities make up the regional unit of Piraeus.
# SENT:  The regional units of Central Athens, North Athens, South Athens, West Athens and Piraeus with part of East and West Attica regional units combined make up the continuous Athens Urban Area, also called the "Urban Area of the Capital" or simply "Athens" (the most common use of the term), spanning over 412 km2 (159 sq mi), with a population of 3,041,131 people as of 2021.
# SENT:  The Athens Urban Area is considered to form the city of Athens as a whole, despite its administrative divisions, which is the largest in Greece and one of the most populated urban areas in Europe.
# PAGE:  https://hif.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greece
# SENT:  It also symbolized the sea, which was called the "Very Green".In Ancient Greece, green and blue were sometimes considered the same color, and the same word sometimes described the color of the sea and the color of trees.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Athens_International_Airport
# SENT:  Athens International Airport Eleftherios Venizelos (Greek: Διεθνής Αερολιμένας Αθηνών «Ελευθέριος Βενιζέλος», Diethnís Aeroliménas Athinón "Elefthérios Venizélos"), commonly initialised as AIA (IATA: ATH, ICAO: LGAV), is the largest international airport in Greece, serving the city of Athens and region of Attica.
# SENT:  Athens International is currently a member of Group 1 of Airports Council International (over 25 million passengers) as of 2022, it is the 19th-busiest airport in Europe and the busiest and largest in the Balkans.
# SENT:  AIA is located between the towns of Markopoulo, Koropi, Spata and Loutsa, about 20 km (12 mi) to the east of central Athens (30 km (19 mi) by road, due to intervening hills).
# SENT:  The airport is named after Elefthérios Venizélos, the prominent Cretan political figure and Prime Minister of Greece, who made a significant contribution to the development of Greek aviation and the Hellenic Air Force in the 1930s.
# SENT:  Currently, private investors include the Copelouzos Group (5%) and PSP Investments of Canada (40%), following purchase of Hochtief's shares.The airport was constructed to replace the now-closed Athens (Ellinikon) International Airport, as the latter had reached its saturation point with no physical space for further growth.
# SENT:  Athens Airport SA, a state-owned company, was established in 1978 to proceed with the plans.
# SENT:  with the then government launching an international tender for the selection of a build-own-operate-transfer partner for the airport project, with Hochtief of Germany being selected.In 1996, Athens International Airport S.A. (AIA) was established as a Public–private partnership with a 30-year concession agreement.
# SENT:  The first ever A380 to visit 'Eleftherios Venizelos' Athens International Airport made an emergency landing on 13 April 2011 for emergency medical reasons.
# SENT:  More than ten new airlines started new flights to and from Athens.
# SENT:  Aegean Airlines strengthened its network by 30% (with many more destinations scheduled for 2015) while Ryanair established a new base in the Athens Airport and added eight destinations.
# SENT:  In recent years its parking stands were utilized for long-term storage of airliners, specifically two ex-Olympic Airways Airbus A340-300s (both aircraft were transferred to its new owner in February 2017) and a Boeing 767-300ER of defunct Greek start-up carrier SkyGreece Airlines.
# SENT:  Athens International Airport is the largest and busiest airport in Greece.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Museums_in_Athens
# SENT:  Museums in the city of Athens, Greece.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:People_from_Athens
# SENT:  People from Athens, Greece.
# WORDPAIR: Tokyo Japan
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tokyo
# SENT:  Tokyo (; Japanese: 東京, Tōkyō, [toːkʲoː] (listen)), officially the Tokyo Metropolis (東京都, Tōkyō-to), is the capital and most populous city of Japan.
# SENT:  Located at the head of Tokyo Bay, the prefecture forms part of the Kantō region on the central coast of Honshu, Japan's largest island.
# SENT:  Tokyo serves as Japan's economic center and is the seat of both the Japanese government and the Emperor of Japan.
# SENT:  Following the Meiji Restoration of 1868, the imperial capital in Kyoto was moved to Edo, which was renamed "Tokyo" (lit.
# SENT:  Tokyo was devastated by the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake, and again by Allied bombing raids during World War II.
# SENT:  Beginning in the 1950s, the city underwent rapid reconstruction and expansion efforts, going on to lead the Japanese economic miracle.
# SENT:  Since 1943, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government has administered the prefecture's 23 special wards (formerly Tokyo City), various commuter towns and suburbs in its western area, and two outlying island chains known as the Tokyo Islands.
# SENT:  Tokyo is the second-largest urban economy worldwide by gross domestic product after New York City, and is categorized as an Alpha+ city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.
# SENT:  It is also Japan's leading business hub as part of an industrial region that includes the cities of Yokohama, Kawasaki, and Chiba.
# SENT:  As of 2021, Tokyo is home to 37 companies of the Fortune Global 500.
# SENT:  Tokyo is home to the world's tallest tower, Tokyo Skytree, and the world's largest underground floodwater diversion facility, the Metropolitan Area Outer Underground Discharge Channel (located in Kasukabe, Saitama, a suburb of Tokyo).
# SENT:  The Tokyo Metro Ginza Line, opened in 1927, is the oldest underground metro line in East Asia.
# SENT:  Recognized as one of the most livable cities in the world, Tokyo was tied fourth with Wellington in the 2021 Global Livability Ranking.The city has hosted multiple international events, including the 1964 Summer Olympics and 1964 Summer Paralympics, the 2020 Summer Olympics and 2020 Summer Paralympics (postponed; held in 2021), and three summits of the G7 (in 1979, 1986, and 1993).
# SENT:  Tokyo is an international  research and development hub and is likewise represented by several major universities, most notably the University of Tokyo.
# SENT:  Tokyo Station is the central hub for Japan's high-speed railway network, the Shinkansen; Shinjuku Station in Tokyo is also the world's busiest train station.
# SENT:  Notable special wards of Tokyo include: Chiyoda, the site of the National Diet Building and the Tokyo Imperial Palace; Shinjuku, the city's administrative center; and Shibuya, a commercial, cultural, and business hub.
# SENT:  Tokyo was originally known as Edo (江戸), a kanji compound of 江 (e, "cove, inlet") and 戸 (to, "entrance, gate, door").
# SENT:  The name, which can be translated as "estuary", is a reference to the original settlement's location at the meeting of the Sumida River and Tokyo Bay.
# SENT:  During the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the name of the city was changed to Tokyo (東京, from 東 tō "east", and 京 kyō "capital"), when it became the new imperial capital, in line with the East Asian tradition of including the word capital (京) in the name of the capital city (for example, Kyoto (京都), Keijō (京城), Beijing (北京), Nanjing (南京), and Xijing (西京)).
# SENT:  During the early Meiji period, the city was sometimes called "Tōkei", an alternative pronunciation for the same characters representing "Tokyo", making it a kanji homograph.
# SENT:  Tokyo was originally a village called Edo, in what was formerly part of the old Musashi Province.
# SENT:  During the subsequent Edo period, Edo grew into one of the largest cities in the world with a population topping one million by the 18th century.Edo was still the home of the Tokugawa shogunate and not the capital of Japan (the Emperor himself lived in Kyoto almost continuously from 794 to 1868).
# SENT:  Edo was renamed Tokyo (Eastern Capital) on September 3, 1868, as the new government was consolidating its power after the fall of the Edo shogunate.
# SENT:  Tokyo was already the nation's political center, and the emperor's residence made it a de facto imperial capital as well, with the former Edo Castle becoming the Imperial Palace.
# SENT:  The city of Tokyo was officially established on May 1, 1889.
# SENT:  The Tokyo Metro Ginza Line portion between Ueno and Asakusa was the first subway line built in Japan and East Asia completed on December 30, 1927.
# SENT:  Central Tokyo, like Osaka, has been designed since about 1900 to be centered on major railway stations in a high-density fashion, so suburban railways were built relatively cheaply at street level and with their own right-of-way.
# SENT:  Though expressways have been built in Tokyo, the basic design has not changed.Tokyo went on to suffer two major catastrophes in the 20th century: the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake, which left 140,000 dead or missing; and World War II.
# SENT:  In 1943, the city of Tokyo merged with the prefecture of Tokyo to form the "Metropolitan Prefecture" of Tokyo.
# SENT:  Since then, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government served as both the prefecture government for Tokyo, as well as administering the special wards of Tokyo, for what had previously been Tokyo City.
# SENT:  World War II wreaked widespread destruction of most of the city due to the persistent Allied air raids on Japan and the use of incendiary bombs.
# SENT:  The bombing of Tokyo in 1944 and 1945 is estimated to have killed between 75,000 and 200,000 civilians and left more than half of the city destroyed.The deadliest night of the war came on March 9–10, 1945, the night of the American "Operation Meetinghouse" raid; as nearly 700,000 incendiary bombs rained on the eastern half of the city, mainly in heavily residential wards.
# SENT:  Between 1940 and 1945, the population of Japan's capital city dwindled from 6,700,000 to less than 2,800,000, with the majority of those who lost their homes living in "ramshackle, makeshift huts".
# SENT:  After the war, Tokyo became the base from which the United States under Douglas MacArthur administered Japan for six years.
# SENT:  Tokyo struggled to rebuild as occupation authorities stepped in and drastically cut back on Japanese government rebuilding programs, focusing instead on simply improving roads and transportation.
# SENT:  Tokyo did not experience fast economic growth until the 1950s.After the occupation of Japan ended in 1952, Tokyo was completely rebuilt and was showcased to the world during the 1964 Summer Olympics.
# SENT:  In 1978, Sunshine 60 – the tallest skyscraper in Asia until 1985, and in Japan until 1991 – and Narita International Airport were constructed, and the population increased to about 11 million in the metropolitan area.
# SENT:  The Edo-Tokyo Open Air Architectural Museum has historic Japanese buildings that existed in the urban landscape of pre-war Tokyo.
# SENT:  Tokyo's subway and commuter rail network became one of the busiest in the world as more and more people moved to the area.
# SENT:  A major recession followed, making the 1990s Japan's "Lost Decade", from which it is now slowly recovering.
# SENT:  Tokyo still sees new urban developments on large lots of less profitable land.
# SENT:  Recent projects include Ebisu Garden Place, Tennōzu Isle, Shiodome, Roppongi Hills, Shinagawa (now also a Shinkansen station), and the Marunouchi side of Tokyo Station.
# SENT:  Buildings of significance have been demolished for more up-to-date shopping facilities such as Omotesando Hills.Land reclamation projects in Tokyo have also been going on for centuries.
# SENT:  Various plans have been proposed for transferring national government functions from Tokyo to secondary capitals in other regions of Japan, to slow down rapid development in Tokyo and revitalize economically lagging areas of the country.
# SENT:  These plans have been controversial within Japan and have yet to be realized.
# SENT:  The 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami that devastated much of the northeastern coast of Honshu was felt in Tokyo.
# SENT:  However, due to Tokyo's earthquake-resistant infrastructure, damage in Tokyo was very minor compared to areas directly hit by the tsunami, although activity in the city was largely halted.
# SENT:  The subsequent nuclear crisis caused by the tsunami has also largely left Tokyo unaffected, despite occasional spikes in radiation levels.On September 7, 2013, the IOC selected Tokyo to host the 2020 Summer Olympics.
# SENT:  Tokyo thus became the first Asian city to host the Olympic Games twice.
# SENT:  Although, COVID-19 has impeded the growth of many industries, the real estate market in Japan is yet to be negatively impacted.
# SENT:  Japanese real estate has become one of the safest investments for foreign investors around the world.As of 2020, the Greater Tokyo Area is the world's largest urban area with over 38 million residents, making it as its largest metro area.
# SENT:  The mainland portion of Tokyo lies northwest of Tokyo Bay and measures about 90 km (56 mi) east to west and 25 km (16 mi) north to south.
# SENT:  The average elevation in Tokyo is 40 m (131 ft).
# SENT:  Mainland Tokyo is further subdivided into the special wards (occupying the eastern half) and the Tama area (多摩地域) stretching westwards.
# SENT:  Tokyo has a latitude of 35.65 (near the 36th parallel north), which makes it more southern than Rome (41.90), Madrid (40.41), New York City (40.71) and Beijing (39.91).Within the administrative boundaries of Tokyo Metropolis are two island chains in the Pacific Ocean directly south: the Izu Islands, and the Ogasawara Islands, which stretch more than 1,000 km (620 mi) away from the mainland.
# SENT:  Because of these islands and the mountainous regions to the west, Tokyo's overall population density figures far under-represent the real figures for the urban and suburban regions of Tokyo.Under Japanese law, the prefecture of Tokyo is designated as a to (都), translated as metropolis.
# SENT:  Tokyo Prefecture is the most populous prefecture and the densest, with 6,100 inhabitants per square kilometer (16,000/sq mi); by geographic area it is the third-smallest, above only Osaka and Kagawa.
# SENT:  Its administrative structure is similar to that of Japan's other prefectures.
# SENT:  The 23 special wards (特別区, tokubetsu-ku), which until 1943 constituted the city of Tokyo, are self-governing municipalities, each having a mayor, a council, and the status of a city.
# SENT:  In addition to these 23 special wards, Tokyo also includes 26 more cities (市 -shi), five towns (町 -chō or machi), and eight villages (村 -son or -mura), each of which has a local government.
# SENT:  Any municipality of Japan has a directly elected mayor and a directly elected assembly, each elected on independent four-year cycles.
# SENT:  It is occupied by many major Japanese companies and is also the seat of the national government, and the Japanese emperor.
# SENT:  To the west of the special wards, Tokyo Metropolis consists of cities, towns, and villages that enjoy the same legal status as those elsewhere in Japan.
# SENT:  Ogasawara also administers two tiny outlying islands: Minami Torishima, the easternmost point in Japan and at 1,850 km (1,150 mi) the most distant island from central Tokyo, and Okinotorishima, the southernmost point in Japan.
# SENT:  Japan's claim on an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) surrounding Okinotorishima is contested by China and South Korea as they regard Okinotorishima as uninhabitable rocks which have no EEZ.
# SENT:  The Iwo chain and the outlying islands have no permanent population, but hosts Japan Self-Defense Forces personnel.
# SENT:  It is not uncommon in the metro area to have hundreds of these minor quakes (magnitudes 4–6) that can be felt in a single year, something local residents merely brush off but can be a source of anxiety not only for foreign visitors but for Japanese from elsewhere as well.
# SENT:  The region, like much of Japan, experiences a one-month seasonal lag.
# SENT:  The record highest low temperature is 30.3 °C (86.5 °F), on August 12, 2013, making Tokyo one of only seven observation sites in Japan that have recorded a low temperature over 30 °C (86.0 °F).Annual rainfall averages nearly 1,530 millimeters (60.2 in), with a wetter summer and a drier winter.
# SENT:  Tokyo features two distinctive towers: Tokyo Tower and Tokyo Skytree, the latter of which is the tallest tower in both Japan and the world, and the second tallest structure in the world after the Burj Khalifa in Dubai.
# SENT:  Governor Shintaro Ishihara created Japan's first emissions cap system, aiming to reduce greenhouse gas emission by a total of 25% by 2020 from the 2000 level.
# SENT:  Tokyo is a major international finance center; it houses the headquarters of several of the world's largest investment banks and insurance companies, and serves as a hub for Japan's transportation, publishing, electronics and broadcasting industries.
# SENT:  During the centralized growth of Japan's economy following World War II, many large firms moved their headquarters from cities such as Osaka (the historical commercial capital) to Tokyo, in an attempt to take advantage of better access to the government.
# SENT:  The Japanese financial market opened up slowly in 1984 and accelerated its internationalization with the "Japanese Big Bang" in 1998.
# SENT:  The Tokyo Stock Exchange is Japan's largest stock exchange, and third largest in the world by market capitalization and fourth largest by share turnover.
# SENT:  In 1990 at the end of the Japanese asset price bubble, it accounted for more than 60% of the world stock market value.
# SENT:  Komatsuna and spinach are the most important vegetables; as of 2000, Tokyo supplied 32.5% of the komatsuna sold at its central produce market.With 36% of its area covered by forest, Tokyo has extensive growths of cryptomeria and Japanese cypress, especially in the mountainous western communities of Akiruno, Ōme, Okutama, Hachiōji, Hinode, and Hinohara.
# SENT:  In 2006, 4.81 million foreigners and 420 million Japanese visits to Tokyo were made; the economic value of these visits totaled 9.4 trillion yen according to the Tokyo Metropolitan Government.
# SENT:  Cultural offerings include both omnipresent Japanese pop culture and associated districts such as Shibuya and Harajuku, subcultural attractions such as Studio Ghibli anime center, as well as museums like the Tokyo National Museum, which houses 37% of the country's artwork national treasures (87/233).
# SENT:  Tokyo, which is the center of the Greater Tokyo Area, is Japan's largest domestic and international hub for rail and ground transportation.
# SENT:  Shibuya Crossing is the "world's busiest pedestrian crossing", with around 3,000 people crossing at a time.As a result of World War II, Japanese planes are generally forbidden to fly over Tokyo.
# SENT:  Therefore, Japan constructed airports outside Tokyo.
# SENT:  Narita International Airport in Chiba Prefecture is the major gateway for international travelers to Japan.
# SENT:  Japan's flag carrier Japan Airlines, as well as All Nippon Airways, have a hub at this airport.
# SENT:  Many of Japan's most prestigious universities are in Tokyo, including University of Tokyo, Hitotsubashi University, Meiji University, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Waseda University, Tokyo University of Science, Sophia University, and Keio University.
# PAGE:  https://hif.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tokyo
# SENT:  Tokyo (; Japanese: 東京, Tōkyō, [toːkʲoː] (listen)), officially the Tokyo Metropolis (東京都, Tōkyō-to), is the capital and most populous city of Japan.
# SENT:  Located at the head of Tokyo Bay, the prefecture forms part of the Kantō region on the central coast of Honshu, Japan's largest island.
# SENT:  Tokyo serves as Japan's economic center and is the seat of both the Japanese government and the Emperor of Japan.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:29, WORD1_SENTS:38, WORD2_SENTS:21
# WORDPAIR: Paris Europe
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris
# SENT:  Paris (French pronunciation: ​[paʁi] (listen)) is the capital and most populous city of France, with an estimated population of 2,165,423 residents in 2019 in an area of more than 105 km² (41 sq mi), making it the 30th most densely populated city in the world in 2020.
# SENT:  Since the 17th century, Paris has been one of the world's major centres of finance, diplomacy, commerce, fashion, gastronomy, and science.
# SENT:  The City of Paris is the centre of the Île-de-France region, or Paris Region, with an estimated population of 12,262,544 in 2019, or about 19% of the population of France, making the region France's primate city.
# SENT:  The Paris Region had a GDP of €739 billion ($743 billion) in 2019, which is the highest in Europe.
# SENT:  According to the Economist Intelligence Unit Worldwide Cost of Living Survey, in 2022, Paris was the city with the ninth-highest cost of living in the world.Paris is a major railway, highway, and air-transport hub served by two international airports: Charles de Gaulle Airport (the second-busiest airport in Europe) and Orly Airport.
# SENT:  Opened in 1900, the city's subway system, the Paris Métro, serves 5.23 million passengers daily; it is the second-busiest metro system in Europe after the Moscow Metro.
# SENT:  Paris is especially known for its museums and architectural landmarks: the Louvre received 2.8 million visitors in 2021, despite the long museum closings caused by the COVID-19 virus.
# SENT:  The Pompidou Centre Musée National d'Art Moderne has the largest collection of modern and contemporary art in Europe and Musée Rodin and Musée Picasso.
# SENT:  The historical district along the Seine in the city centre has been classified as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1991; popular landmarks there include the Cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris on the Île de la Cité, now closed for renovation after the 15 April 2019 fire.
# SENT:  Other popular tourist sites include the Gothic royal chapel of Sainte-Chapelle, also on the Île de la Cité; the Eiffel Tower, constructed for the Paris Universal Exposition of 1889; the Grand Palais and Petit Palais, built for the Paris Universal Exposition of 1900; the Arc de Triomphe on the Champs-Élysées, and the hill of Montmartre with its artistic history and its Basilica of Sacré-Coeur.Paris hosts several United Nations organisations including UNESCO, and other international organisations such as the OECD, the OECD Development Centre, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, the International Energy Agency, the International Federation for Human Rights, along with European bodies such as the European Space Agency, the European Banking Authority or the European Securities and Markets Authority.
# SENT:  The football club Paris Saint-Germain and the rugby union club Stade Français are based in Paris.
# SENT:  The 80,000-seat Stade de France, built for the 1998 FIFA World Cup, is located just north of Paris in the neighbouring commune of Saint-Denis.
# SENT:  Paris hosts the annual French Open Grand Slam tennis tournament on the red clay of Roland Garros.
# SENT:  The 1938 and 1998 FIFA World Cups, the 2007 Rugby World Cup, as well as the 1960, 1984 and 2016 UEFA European Championships were also held in the city.
# SENT:  Every July, the Tour de France bicycle race finishes on the Avenue des Champs-Élysées in Paris.
# SENT:  The ancient oppidum that corresponds to the modern city of Paris was first mentioned in the mid-1st century BC by Julius Caesar as Luteciam Parisiorum ('Lutetia of the Parisii'), and is later attested as Parision in the 5th century AD, then as Paris in 1265.
# SENT:  During the Roman period, it was commonly known as Lutetia or Lutecia in Latin, and as Leukotekía in Greek, which is interpreted as either stemming from the Celtic root *lukot- ('mouse'), or from *luto- ('marsh, swamp'), depending on whether the Latin or Greek form is the closest to the original Gaulish name.The name Paris is derived from its early inhabitants, the Parisii (Gaulish: Parisioi), a Gallic tribe from the Iron Age and the Roman period.
# SENT:  Alternatively, Pierre-Yves Lambert proposed to translate Parisii as the 'spear people', by connecting the first element to the Old Irish carr ('spear'), derived from an earlier *kwar-sā.
# SENT:  In any case, the city's name is not related to the Paris of Greek mythology.
# SENT:  Paris is often referred to as the 'City of Light' (La Ville Lumière), both because of its leading role during the Age of Enlightenment and more literally because Paris was one of the first large European cities to use gas street lighting on a grand scale on its boulevards and monuments.
# SENT:  By the 1860s, the boulevards and streets of Paris were illuminated by 56,000 gas lamps.
# SENT:  Since the late 19th century, Paris has also been known as Panam(e) (pronounced [panam]) in French slang.Inhabitants are known in English as "Parisians" and in French as Parisiens ([paʁizjɛ̃] (listen)).
# SENT:  The Parisii, a sub-tribe of the Celtic Senones, inhabited the Paris area from around the middle of the 3rd century BC.
# SENT:  The Parisii traded with many river towns (some as far away as the Iberian Peninsula) and minted their own coins for that purpose.
# SENT:  The Romans conquered the Paris Basin in 52 BC and began their settlement on Paris's Left Bank.
# SENT:  The Roman town was originally called Lutetia (more fully, Lutetia Parisiorum, "Lutetia of the Parisii", modern French Lutèce).
# SENT:  It became a prosperous city with a forum, baths, temples, theatres, and an amphitheatre.By the end of the Western Roman Empire, the town was known as Parisius, a Latin name that would later become Paris in French.
# SENT:  Christianity was introduced in the middle of the 3rd century AD by Saint Denis, the first Bishop of Paris: according to legend, when he refused to renounce his faith before the Roman occupiers, he was beheaded on the hill which became known as Mons Martyrum (Latin "Hill of Martyrs"), later "Montmartre", from where he walked headless to the north of the city; the place where he fell and was buried became an important religious shrine, the Basilica of Saint-Denis, and many French kings are buried there.Clovis the Frank, the first king of the Merovingian dynasty, made the city his capital from 508.
# SENT:  As the Frankish domination of Gaul began, there was a gradual immigration by the Franks to Paris and the Parisian Francien dialects were born.
# SENT:  Fortification of the Île de la Cité failed to avert sacking by Vikings in 845, but Paris's strategic importance—with its bridges preventing ships from passing—was established by successful defence in the Siege of Paris (885–886), for which the then Count of Paris (comte de Paris), Odo of France, was elected king of West Francia.
# SENT:  From the Capetian dynasty that began with the 987 election of Hugh Capet, Count of Paris and Duke of the Franks (duc des Francs), as king of a unified West Francia, Paris gradually became the largest and most prosperous city in France.
# SENT:  By the end of the 12th century, Paris had become the political, economic, religious, and cultural capital of France.
# SENT:  In 1163, during the reign of Louis VII, Maurice de Sully, bishop of Paris, undertook the construction of the Notre Dame Cathedral at its eastern extremity.
# SENT:  After the marshland between the river Seine and its slower 'dead arm' to its north was filled in from around the 10th century, Paris's cultural centre began to move to the Right Bank.
# SENT:  The latter location housed the headquarters of Paris's river trade corporation, an organisation that later became, unofficially (although formally in later years), Paris's first municipal government.
# SENT:  In 1190, he transformed Paris's former cathedral school into a student-teacher corporation that would become the University of Paris and would draw students from all of Europe.With 200,000 inhabitants in 1328, Paris, then already the capital of France, was the most populous city of Europe.
# SENT:  By the early fourteenth century so much filth had collected inside urban Europe that French and Italian cities were naming streets after human waste.
# SENT:  In medieval Paris, several street names were inspired by merde, the French word for "shit".
# SENT:  During the Hundred Years' War, Paris was occupied by England-friendly Burgundian forces from 1418, before being occupied outright by the English when Henry V of England entered the French capital in 1420; in spite of a 1429 effort by Joan of Arc to liberate the city, it would remain under English occupation until 1436.
# SENT:  In the late 16th-century French Wars of Religion, Paris was a stronghold of the Catholic League, the organisers of 24 August 1572 St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in which thousands of French Protestants were killed.
# SENT:  This king made several improvements to the capital during his reign: he completed the construction of Paris's first uncovered, sidewalk-lined bridge, the Pont Neuf, built a Louvre extension connecting it to the Tuileries Palace, and created the first Paris residential square, the Place Royale, now Place des Vosges.
# SENT:  In spite of Henry IV's efforts to improve city circulation, the narrowness of Paris's streets was a contributing factor in his assassination near Les Halles marketplace in 1610.During the 17th century, Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister of Louis XIII, was determined to make Paris the most beautiful city in Europe.
# SENT:  Due to the Parisian uprisings during the Fronde civil war, Louis XIV moved his court to a new palace, Versailles, in 1682.
# SENT:  Paris grew in population from about 400,000 in 1640 to 650,000 in 1780.
# SENT:  Paris was the centre of an explosion of philosophic and scientific activity known as the Age of Enlightenment.
# SENT:  Paris was the financial capital of continental Europe, the primary European centre of book publishing and fashion and the manufacture of fine furniture and luxury goods.In the summer of 1789, Paris became the centre stage for the French Revolution.
# SENT:  The first independent Paris Commune, or city council, met in the Hôtel de Ville and, on 15 July, elected a Mayor, the astronomer Jean Sylvain Bailly.Louis XVI and the royal family were brought to Paris and made prisoners within the Tuileries Palace.
# SENT:  A succession of revolutionary factions ruled Paris until 9 November 1799 (coup d'état du 18 brumaire), when Napoléon Bonaparte seized power as First Consul.The population of Paris had dropped by 100,000 during the Revolution, but between 1799 and 1815, it surged with 160,000 new residents, reaching 660,000.
# SENT:  Napoleon Bonaparte replaced the elected government of Paris with a prefect reporting only to him.
# SENT:  During the Restoration, the bridges and squares of Paris were returned to their pre-Revolution names; the July Revolution in 1830 (commemorated by the July Column on the Place de la Bastille) brought a constitutional monarch, Louis Philippe I, to power.
# SENT:  The first railway line to Paris opened in 1837, beginning a new period of massive migration from the provinces to the city.
# SENT:  Louis-Philippe was overthrown by a popular uprising in the streets of Paris in 1848.
# SENT:  In 1860, Napoleon III also annexed the surrounding towns and created eight new arrondissements, expanding Paris to its current limits.During the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), Paris was besieged by the Prussian Army.
# SENT:  Paris has a typical Western European oceanic climate (Köppen: Cfb), which is affected by the North Atlantic Current.
# SENT:  The Constitutional Council, an advisory body with ultimate authority on the constitutionality of laws and government decrees, also meets in the Montpensier wing of the Palais Royal.Paris and its region host the headquarters of several international organisations including UNESCO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the International Chamber of Commerce, the Paris Club, the European Space Agency, the International Energy Agency, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, the European Union Institute for Security Studies, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, the International Exhibition Bureau, and the International Federation for Human Rights.
# SENT:  Despite the drop, Paris remains the most densely-populated city in Europe, with 252 residents per hectare, not counting parks.
# SENT:  This drop was attributed partly to a lower birth rate, the departure of middle-class residents and the possible loss of housing in the city due to short-term rentals for tourism.Paris is the fourth largest municipality in the European Union, following Berlin, Madrid and Rome.
# SENT:  The city's population loss came to a temporary halt at the beginning of the 21st century; the population increased from 2,125,246 in 1999 to 2,240,621 in 2012, before declining again slightly in 2017, 2018, and again in 2021.Paris is the core of a built-up area that extends well beyond its limits: commonly referred to as the agglomération Parisienne, and statistically as a unité urbaine (a measure of urban area), the Paris agglomeration's population of 10,785,092 in 2017 made it the largest urban area in the European Union.
# SENT:  City-influenced commuter activity reaches well beyond even this in a statistical aire d'attraction de Paris ("functional area", a statistical method comparable to a metropolitan area), that had a population of 13,024,518 in 2017, 19.6% of the population of France, and the largest metropolitan area in the Eurozone.According to Eurostat, the EU statistical agency, in 2012 the Commune of Paris was the most densely populated city in the European Union, with 21,616 people per square kilometre within the city limits (the NUTS-3 statistical area), ahead of Inner London West, which had 10,374 people per square kilometre.
# SENT:  According to the 2012 census, 135,853 residents of the City of Paris were immigrants from Europe, 112,369 were immigrants from the Maghreb, 70,852 from sub-Saharan Africa and Egypt, 5,059 from Turkey, 91,297 from Asia (outside Turkey), 38,858 from the Americas, and 1,365 from the South Pacific.
# SENT:  Note that the immigrants from the Americas and the South Pacific in Paris are vastly outnumbered by migrants from French overseas regions and territories located in these regions of the world.In the Paris Region, 590,504 residents were immigrants from Europe, 627,078 were immigrants from the Maghreb, 435,339 from sub-Saharan Africa and Egypt, 69,338 from Turkey, 322,330 from Asia (outside Turkey), 113,363 from the Americas, and 2,261 from the South Pacific.
# SENT:  Paris hosts the headquarters of the European Space Agency, the International Energy Agency, European Securities and Markets Authority and, since 2019, the European Banking Authority.
# SENT:  In 2019, its GDP ranked first among the regions of Europe and its per-capita GDP PPP was the 7th highest in Europe.
# SENT:  While the Paris economy is dominated by services, and employment in manufacturing sector has declined sharply, the region remains an important manufacturing centre, particularly for aeronautics, automobiles, and "eco" industries.In the 2017 worldwide cost of living survey by the Economist Intelligence Unit, based on a survey made in September 2016, Paris ranked as the seventh most expensive city in the world, and the second most expensive in Europe, after Zurich.In 2018, Paris was the most expensive city in the world with Singapore and Hong Kong.Station F is a business incubator for startups, located in 13th arrondissement of Paris.
# SENT:  Paris hosts one of the largest science museums in Europe, the Cité des sciences et de l'industrie, (984,000 visitors in 2020).
# SENT:  The Guimet Museum, or Musée national des arts asiatiques, has one of the largest collections of Asian art in Europe.
# SENT:  Other famous theatres include the Odéon-Théâtre de l'Europe, just north of the Luxembourg Gardens, also a state institution and theatrical landmark; the Théâtre Mogador, and the Théâtre de la Gaîté-Montparnasse.The music hall and cabaret are famous Paris institutions.
# SENT:  European and Asian films are also widely shown and appreciated.
# SENT:  On 2 February 2000, Philippe Binant realised the first digital cinema projection in Europe, with the DLP CINEMA technology developed by Texas Instruments, in Paris.
# SENT:  There are also many business schools, including HEC, INSEAD, ESSEC, and ESCP Europe.
# SENT:  In 2023, a professional American football team, the Paris Saints, were formed in the city joining the European league of football.
# SENT:  It is the largest hospital system in Europe.
# SENT:  Other hospitals include Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital (one of the largest in Europe), Hôpital Cochin, Bichat–Claude Bernard Hospital, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, Bicêtre Hospital, Beaujon Hospital, the Curie Institute, Lariboisière Hospital, Necker–Enfants Malades Hospital, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Hôpital de la Charité and the American Hospital of Paris.
# SENT:  Another news agency is France Diplomatie, owned and operated by the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs, and pertains solely to diplomatic news and occurrences.The most-viewed network in France, TF1, is in nearby Boulogne-Billancourt.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Europe
# SENT:  Europe is a continent which is part of Eurasia and is located entirely in the Northern Hemisphere and mostly in the Eastern Hemisphere.
# SENT:  Europe is commonly considered to be separated from Asia by the watershed of the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, the Caspian Sea, the Greater Caucasus, the Black Sea and the waterways of the Turkish Straits.Europe covers about 10.18 million km2 (3.93 million sq mi), or 2% of Earth's surface (6.8% of land area), making it the second-smallest continent (using the seven-continent model).
# SENT:  Politically, Europe is divided into about fifty sovereign states, of which Russia is the largest and most populous, spanning 39% of the continent and comprising 15% of its population.
# SENT:  Europe had a total population of about 745 million (about 10% of the world population) in 2021.
# SENT:  The European climate is largely affected by warm Atlantic currents that temper winters and summers on much of the continent, even at latitudes along which the climate in Asia and North America is severe.
# SENT:  European culture is the root of Western civilisation, which traces its lineage back to ancient Greece and ancient Rome.
# SENT:  The fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE and the related Migration Period marked the end of Europe's ancient history, and the beginning of the Middle Ages.
# SENT:  Since the Age of Discovery, started by Spain and Portugal, Europe played a predominant role in global affairs.
# SENT:  Between the 16th and 20th centuries, European powers colonised at various times the Americas, almost all of Africa and Oceania, and the majority of Asia.
# SENT:  The Industrial Revolution, which began in Great Britain at the end of the 18th century, gave rise to radical economic, cultural and social change in Western Europe and eventually the wider world.
# SENT:  Both world wars took place for the most part in Europe, contributing to a decline in Western European dominance in world affairs by the mid-20th century as the Soviet Union and the United States took prominence.
# SENT:  During the Cold War, Europe was divided along the Iron Curtain between NATO in the West and the Warsaw Pact in the East, until the Revolutions of 1989, Fall of the Berlin Wall and the Dissolution of the Soviet Union.
# SENT:  In 1949, the Council of Europe was founded with the idea of unifying Europe to achieve common goals and prevent future wars.
# SENT:  Further European integration by some states led to the formation of the European Union (EU), a separate political entity that lies between a confederation and a federation.
# SENT:  The EU originated in Western Europe but has been expanding eastward since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991.
# SENT:  The currency of most countries of the European Union, the euro, is the most commonly used among Europeans; and the EU's Schengen Area abolishes border and immigration controls between most of its member states, and some non-member states.
# SENT:  There exists a political movement favouring the evolution of the European Union into a single federation encompassing much of the continent.
# SENT:  Broad has been an epithet of Earth herself in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion and the poetry devoted to it.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:23, WORD1_SENTS:42, WORD2_SENTS:27
# WORDPAIR: Karnataka Bengaluru
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangalore
# SENT:  Bangalore (), officially Bengaluru (Kannada pronunciation: [ˈbeŋgɐɭuːɾu] (listen)), is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Karnataka.
# SENT:  Following India's independence in 1947, Bangalore became the capital of Mysore State, and remained the capital when the new Indian state of Karnataka was formed in 1956.
# SENT:  Suryanath Kamath has put forward an explanation of a possible floral origin of the name as derived from benga, the Kannada term for Pterocarpus marsupium (also known as the Indian Kino Tree), a species of dry and moist deciduous trees that grows abundantly in the region.On 11 December 2005, the Government of Karnataka accepted a proposal by Jnanpith Award winner U. R. Ananthamurthy to rename Bangalore to Bengalūru.
# SENT:  On 27 September 2006, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) passed a resolution to implement the name change.
# SENT:  The government of Karnataka accepted the proposal and it was decided to officially implement the name change from 1 November 2006.
# SENT:  The Union government approved this request, along with name changes for 11 other Karnataka cities, in October 2014.
# SENT:  Hence, Bangalore was renamed to "Bengaluru" on 1 November 2014.
# SENT:  Between the fourth and tenth centuries, the region was ruled by the Western Ganga dynasty of Karnataka, the first dynasty to set up effective control over the region.
# SENT:  The Chokkanathaswamy temple at Domlur, the Aigandapura complex near Hesaraghatta, Mukthi Natheshwara Temple at Binnamangala, Choleshwara Temple at Begur, Someshwara Temple at Ulsoor, date from the Chola era.In 1117, the Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana defeated the Cholas in the Battle of Talakad in south Karnataka, and extended its rule over the region.
# SENT:  The Government of Karnataka later constituted the Bangalore Development Authority in 1976 to coordinate the activities of these two bodies.
# SENT:  Bangalore experienced rapid growth in the decades 1941–51 and 1971–81, which saw the arrival of many immigrants from northern Karnataka.
# SENT:  Bangalore lies in the southeast of the South Indian state of Karnataka.
# SENT:  The majority of the city of Bangalore lies in the Bangalore Urban district of Karnataka and the surrounding rural areas are a part of the Bangalore Rural district.
# SENT:  The Government of Karnataka has carved out the new district of Ramanagara from the old Bangalore Rural district.Bangalore's topography is generally flat, although the western parts of the city are hilly.
# SENT:  The Kannada language spoken in Bangalore is a form called as 'Old Mysuru Kannada' which is also used in most of the southern part of Karnataka.
# SENT:  Telugu-speaking people initially came to Bangalore on invitation by the Mysore royalty.Other native communities are the Tuluvas and the Konkanis of coastal Karnataka, and the Kodavas of the state's Kodagu district.
# SENT:  The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP, Greater Bangalore Municipal Corporation) is in charge of civic administration of the city.
# SENT:  As capital of the state of Karnataka, Bangalore houses important state government facilities such as the Karnataka High Court, the Vidhana Soudha (the home of the Karnataka state legislature) and Raj Bhavan (the residence of the governor of Karnataka).
# SENT:  Bangalore contributes four members to the lower house of the Indian Parliament, the Lok Sabha, from its four constituencies: Bangalore Rural, Bangalore Central, Bangalore North, and Bangalore South, and 28 members to the Karnataka Legislative Assembly.Electricity in Bangalore is regulated through the Bangalore Electricity Supply Company (BESCOM), while water supply and sanitation facilities are provided by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB).The city has offices of the Consulate General of Germany, France, Japan, Israel, British Deputy High Commission, along with honorary consulates of Ireland, Finland, Switzerland, Maldives, Mongolia, Sri Lanka and Peru.
# SENT:  According to a 2012 report submitted to the World Bank by Karnataka Slum Clearance Board, Bangalore had 862 slums out of around 2000 slums in all of Karnataka.
# SENT:  The Karnataka Municipality works to shift 300 families annually to newly constructed buildings.
# SENT:  Waste management in Karnataka is regulated by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) under the aegis of the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), a Central Government entity.
# SENT:  As part of the Waste Management Guidelines, the government of Karnataka through the KSPCB has authorised a few well-established companies to manage biomedical and other hazardous waste in Karnataka.
# SENT:  Ideological clashes sometimes occur between the city's IT moguls, who demand an improvement in the city's infrastructure; and the state government, whose electorate is primarily from rural Karnataka.
# SENT:  The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation operates 6,918 buses on 6,352 schedules, connecting Bangalore with other parts of Karnataka and with neighbouring states.
# SENT:  The Someshwara Car festival, held annually in April, is a procession of the idol of the Halasuru Someshwara Temple (Ulsoor) led by the Vokkaligas, a major landholding community in southern Karnataka.
# SENT:  Karnataka Rajyotsava is widely celebrated on 1 November and is a public holiday in the city, to mark the formation of Karnataka state on 1 November 1956.
# SENT:  The city has its own literary festival, known as the "Bangalore Literature Festival", inaugurated in 2012.The Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath is an art gallery that showcases a collection of painting, sculptures, and various other forms of art.
# SENT:  Yakshagana, a theatre art indigenous to coastal Karnataka is often played in town halls.
# SENT:  Vijaya Karnataka and The Times of India are the most widely circulated newspapers in Kannada and English, respectively, closely followed by the Prajavani and Deccan Herald – both owned by the Printers (Mysore) Limited, the largest print media house in Karnataka.
# SENT:  The service is operated by D-VoiS and is paid for by the Karnataka state government.
# SENT:  The Indian Super League club Bengaluru FC are based in the city.
# SENT:  The I-League 2nd Division clubs FC Bengaluru United, Ozone FC and South United FC are also based in Bangalore.The city hosts the Women's Tennis Association (WTA) Bangalore Open tournament annually.
# SENT:  Bangalore is home to the Bengaluru Beast—the 2017 vice-champion of India's top professional basketball division, the UBA Pro Basketball League.The Kanteerava Indoor Stadium and Sheraton Grand has hosted various kabaddi matches, including the entire Pro Kabaddi League Season 8.
# SENT:  The Bengaluru Bulls is one of the teams in this league.
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangalore
# SENT:  Bangalore (), officially Bengaluru (Kannada pronunciation: [ˈbeŋgɐɭuːɾu] (listen)), is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Karnataka.
# SENT:  Following India's independence in 1947, Bangalore became the capital of Mysore State, and remained the capital when the new Indian state of Karnataka was formed in 1956.
# SENT:  Suryanath Kamath has put forward an explanation of a possible floral origin of the name as derived from benga, the Kannada term for Pterocarpus marsupium (also known as the Indian Kino Tree), a species of dry and moist deciduous trees that grows abundantly in the region.On 11 December 2005, the Government of Karnataka accepted a proposal by Jnanpith Award winner U. R. Ananthamurthy to rename Bangalore to Bengalūru.
# SENT:  On 27 September 2006, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) passed a resolution to implement the name change.
# SENT:  The government of Karnataka accepted the proposal and it was decided to officially implement the name change from 1 November 2006.
# SENT:  The Union government approved this request, along with name changes for 11 other Karnataka cities, in October 2014.
# SENT:  Hence, Bangalore was renamed to "Bengaluru" on 1 November 2014.
# SENT:  Between the fourth and tenth centuries, the region was ruled by the Western Ganga dynasty of Karnataka, the first dynasty to set up effective control over the region.
# SENT:  The Chokkanathaswamy temple at Domlur, the Aigandapura complex near Hesaraghatta, Mukthi Natheshwara Temple at Binnamangala, Choleshwara Temple at Begur, Someshwara Temple at Ulsoor, date from the Chola era.In 1117, the Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana defeated the Cholas in the Battle of Talakad in south Karnataka, and extended its rule over the region.
# SENT:  The Government of Karnataka later constituted the Bangalore Development Authority in 1976 to coordinate the activities of these two bodies.
# SENT:  Bangalore experienced rapid growth in the decades 1941–51 and 1971–81, which saw the arrival of many immigrants from northern Karnataka.
# SENT:  Bangalore lies in the southeast of the South Indian state of Karnataka.
# SENT:  The majority of the city of Bangalore lies in the Bangalore Urban district of Karnataka and the surrounding rural areas are a part of the Bangalore Rural district.
# SENT:  The Government of Karnataka has carved out the new district of Ramanagara from the old Bangalore Rural district.Bangalore's topography is generally flat, although the western parts of the city are hilly.
# SENT:  The Kannada language spoken in Bangalore is a form called as 'Old Mysuru Kannada' which is also used in most of the southern part of Karnataka.
# SENT:  Telugu-speaking people initially came to Bangalore on invitation by the Mysore royalty.Other native communities are the Tuluvas and the Konkanis of coastal Karnataka, and the Kodavas of the state's Kodagu district.
# SENT:  The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP, Greater Bangalore Municipal Corporation) is in charge of civic administration of the city.
# SENT:  As capital of the state of Karnataka, Bangalore houses important state government facilities such as the Karnataka High Court, the Vidhana Soudha (the home of the Karnataka state legislature) and Raj Bhavan (the residence of the governor of Karnataka).
# SENT:  Bangalore contributes four members to the lower house of the Indian Parliament, the Lok Sabha, from its four constituencies: Bangalore Rural, Bangalore Central, Bangalore North, and Bangalore South, and 28 members to the Karnataka Legislative Assembly.Electricity in Bangalore is regulated through the Bangalore Electricity Supply Company (BESCOM), while water supply and sanitation facilities are provided by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB).The city has offices of the Consulate General of Germany, France, Japan, Israel, British Deputy High Commission, along with honorary consulates of Ireland, Finland, Switzerland, Maldives, Mongolia, Sri Lanka and Peru.
# SENT:  According to a 2012 report submitted to the World Bank by Karnataka Slum Clearance Board, Bangalore had 862 slums out of around 2000 slums in all of Karnataka.
# SENT:  The Karnataka Municipality works to shift 300 families annually to newly constructed buildings.
# SENT:  Waste management in Karnataka is regulated by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) under the aegis of the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), a Central Government entity.
# SENT:  As part of the Waste Management Guidelines, the government of Karnataka through the KSPCB has authorised a few well-established companies to manage biomedical and other hazardous waste in Karnataka.
# SENT:  Ideological clashes sometimes occur between the city's IT moguls, who demand an improvement in the city's infrastructure; and the state government, whose electorate is primarily from rural Karnataka.
# SENT:  The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation operates 6,918 buses on 6,352 schedules, connecting Bangalore with other parts of Karnataka and with neighbouring states.
# SENT:  The Indian Super League club Bengaluru FC are based in the city.
# SENT:  The I-League 2nd Division clubs FC Bengaluru United, Ozone FC and South United FC are also based in Bangalore.The city hosts the Women's Tennis Association (WTA) Bangalore Open tournament annually.
# SENT:  Bangalore is home to the Bengaluru Beast—the 2017 vice-champion of India's top professional basketball division, the UBA Pro Basketball League.The Kanteerava Indoor Stadium and Sheraton Grand has hosted various kabaddi matches, including the entire Pro Kabaddi League Season 8.
# SENT:  The Bengaluru Bulls is one of the teams in this league.
# PAGE:  https://kn.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E0%B2%AC%E0%B3%86%E0%B2%82%E0%B2%97%E0%B2%B3%E0%B3%82%E0%B2%B0%E0%B3%81
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangalore_geography_and_environment
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Bangalore
# SENT:  The oldest inscription in current-day Bengaluru is the Hebbal-Kittayya inscription, which dates back to the Ganga dynasty in Karnataka and mentions the administration of Sripurusha.
# SENT:  The first mention of the name Bengaluru, albeit in the form 'Benguluru' is from an inscription in Begur dated to 9th century CE.
# SENT:  Written in Halegannada (ancient Kannada), it mentions 'Bengaluru Kadana' (battle of Bengaluru).
# SENT:  Bengaluru remained part of British East India until Indian independence in August, 1947.
# SENT:  The 'Residency' of Mysore State was first established at Mysore in 1799 and later shifted to Bengaluru in the year 1804.
# SENT:  abolished in the year 1843 only to be revived in 1881 at Bengaluru and finally to be closed down in 1947 with the departure of the 
# SENT:  The crisis caused by this epidemic catalyzed the improvement and sanitation of Bengaluru and, in turn, improvements in sanitation and health facilities helped to modernize Bengaluru.
# SENT:  In 2005, the Government of Karnataka announced it had accepted a proposal to rename Bangalore to Bengaluru.
# SENT:  In 2006, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), the third level of government, passed a resolution to implement the proposed name change.
# SENT:  In 2014, Union ministry approved the name change to Bengaluru.
# SENT:  Fazlul Hasan.
# SENT:  Bengaluru Through the Centuries.
# SENT:  Bengaluru to Bangalore: urban history of Bangalore from the pre-historic period to the end of the 18th century.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangalore_district
# SENT:  Bengaluru District was a district in the state of Karnataka, India.
# SENT:  In 1986, Bangalore District was bifurcated into Bengaluru Urban district and Bengaluru Rural district.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karnataka
# SENT:  Its capital and largest city is Bengaluru.
# SENT:  In 1537,  Kempe Gowda I, a chieftain of the Vijayanagara Empire, widely held as the founder of modern Bangalore, built a fort and established the area around it as Bengaluru Pete.In 1565, Karnataka and the rest of South India experienced a major geopolitical shift when the Vijayanagara empire fell to a confederation of Islamic sultanates in the Battle of Talikota.
# SENT:  The Royal Challengers Bangalore, an Indian Premier League franchise, the Bengaluru Football Club, an Indian Super League franchise, the Bengaluru Yodhas, a Pro Wrestling League franchise, the Bengaluru Blasters, a Premier Badminton League franchise and the Bengaluru Bulls, a Pro Kabaddi League franchise are based in Bangalore.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture_of_Bangalore
# SENT:  Bengaluru FC is a football club based in Bangalore and was formed in 2013.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangalore_Urban_district
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy_of_Bangalore
# SENT:  The economy of Bengaluru contributes over 43.65% to the economy of the State of Karnataka, accounting for 98% of the Software Exports of the State.
# SENT:  As of 2020, IT firms in Bengaluru employ about 1.5 million employees in the IT and IT-enabled services (ITES)/BPM sectors, out of nearly 4.4 million employees across India and account for the highest IT-related exports in the country.
# SENT:  Architecture: Samsung Electronics in 2018, opened Largest Mobile Experience Centre in the World at Bengaluru’s Iconic Opera House.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greater_Bangalore
# SENT:  Greater Bangalore, or Greater Bengaluru following the renaming of the city in 2014, is the core metropolitan area of Bangalore and its neighbouring regions.
# PAGE:  https://pam.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangalore
# SENT:  Bangalore (), officially Bengaluru (Kannada pronunciation: [ˈbeŋgɐɭuːɾu] (listen)), is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Karnataka.
# SENT:  On 27 September 2006, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) passed a resolution to implement the name change.
# SENT:  Hence, Bangalore was renamed to "Bengaluru" on 1 November 2014.
# SENT:  The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP, Greater Bangalore Municipal Corporation) is in charge of civic administration of the city.
# SENT:  The Indian Super League club Bengaluru FC are based in the city.
# SENT:  The I-League 2nd Division clubs FC Bengaluru United, Ozone FC and South United FC are also based in Bangalore.The city hosts the Women's Tennis Association (WTA) Bangalore Open tournament annually.
# SENT:  Bangalore is home to the Bengaluru Beast—the 2017 vice-champion of India's top professional basketball division, the UBA Pro Basketball League.The Kanteerava Indoor Stadium and Sheraton Grand has hosted various kabaddi matches, including the entire Pro Kabaddi League Season 8.
# SENT:  The Bengaluru Bulls is one of the teams in this league.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lakes_in_Bangalore
# SENT:  Nature in the City: Bengaluru in the Past, Present, and Future.
# SENT:  Final Report on Inventorisation of Water Bodies in Bengaluru Metropolitan Area (BMA), vol.
# SENT:  Volume-II: Lake Database and Atlas (Part-2: Bengaluru East Taluk)
# SENT:  Volume-II: Lake Database and Atlas (Part-4: Bengaluru South Taluk)
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:8, WORD1_SENTS:48, WORD2_SENTS:43
# WORDPAIR: Tripura Agartala
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tripura
# SENT:  Tripura (, Bengali:[ˈtri̯puraˈ] (listen) ) is a state in Northeast India.
# SENT:  Tripura is divided into 8 districts and 23 sub-divisions, where Agartala is the capital and the largest city in the state.
# SENT:  Tripura has 19 different tribal communities with a majority of the Bengali population.
# SENT:  Bengali, English and Kokborok are the state's official languages.The area of modern Tripura — ruled for several centuries by the Manikya Dynasty — was part of the Tripuri Kingdom (also known as Hill Tippera).
# SENT:  Tripura lies in a geographically isolated location in India, as only one major highway, National Highway 8, connects it with the rest of the country.
# SENT:  Five mountain ranges — Hathai Kotor, Atharamura, Longtharai, Shakhan and Jampui Hills — run north to south, with intervening valleys; Agartala, the capital, is located on a plain to the west.
# SENT:  Tripura has the highest number of primate species found in any Indian state.
# SENT:  Poverty and unemployment continue to plague Tripura, which has a limited infrastructure.
# SENT:  According to the 2011 census, Tripura is one of the most literate states in India, with a literacy rate of 87.75%.
# SENT:  The name Tripura is linked to the Hindu goddess Tripura Sundari, the presiding deity of the Tripura Sundari Temple at Udaipur, one of the 51 Shakti Peethas (pilgrimage centres of Shaktism), and to the legendary tyrant king Tripur, who reigned in the region.
# SENT:  Tripur was the 39th descendant of Druhyu, who belonged to the lineage of Yayati, a king of the Lunar Dynasty.There are alternative theories regarding the origin of the name Tripura, such as a possible etymological reinterpretation to Sanskrit of a Tibeto-Burman (Kokborok) name.
# SENT:  A Kokborok etymology from  tüi (water) and pra (near) has been suggested; the boundaries of Tripura extended to the Bay of Bengal when the kings of the Tipra Kingdom held sway from the Garo Hills of Meghalaya to Arakan, the present Rakhine State of Burma; so the name may reflect vicinity to the sea.
# SENT:  Although there is no evidence of lower or middle Paleolithic settlements in Tripura, Upper Paleolithic tools made of fossil wood have been found in the Haora and Khowai valleys.
# SENT:  The Indian epic, the Mahabharata; ancient religious texts, the Puranas; and the Edicts of Ashoka – stone pillar inscriptions of the emperor Ashoka dating from the third century BCE – all mention Tripura.
# SENT:  An ancient name of Tripura (as mentioned in the Mahabharata) is Kirat Desh (English: "The land of Kirat"), probably referring to the Kirata Kingdoms or the more generic term Kirata.
# SENT:  : 155  However, it is unclear whether the extent of modern Tripura is coterminous with Kirat Desh.
# SENT:  Tripura became a princely state during British rule in India.
# SENT:  The kings had an estate in British India, known as Tippera district or Chakla Roshanbad (now the Comilla district of Bangladesh), in addition to the independent area known as Hill Tippera, roughly corresponding to the present day Tripura state.
# SENT:  Udaipur, in the south of Tripura, was the capital of the kingdom, until the king Krishna Manikya moved the capital to Old Agartala in the 18th century.
# SENT:  It was moved to the new city of Agartala in the 19th century.
# SENT:  Bir Chandra Manikya (1862–1896) modelled his administration on the pattern of British India, and enacted reforms including the formation of Agartala Municipal Corporation.
# SENT:  The Maharani Regent of Tripura signed the Tripura Merger Agreement on 9 September 1949, making Tripura a Part C state of India.
# SENT:  The road distance between Kolkata and Agartala before the partition was less than 350 km (220 mi), and increased to 1,700 km (1,100 mi), as the route now avoided East Pakistan.
# SENT:  : 93 After the partition of India, many Bengali Hindus migrated to Tripura as refugees fleeing religious persecution in Muslim-majority East Pakistan, especially after 1949.: 3–4  Settlement by Hindu Bengalis increased during the Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971.
# SENT:  Following the war, the Indian government reorganised the North East region to ensure effective control of the international borders – three new states came into existence on 21 January 1972: Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura.
# SENT:  Tripura remains peaceful, as of 2016.
# SENT:  In retaliation of the communal violence against the Hindu minority in neighboring Bangladesh, mosques in several areas in Tripura were attacked from 19 to 26 October 2021.
# SENT:  Tripura is a landlocked state in North East India, where the seven contiguous states – Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura – are collectively known as the Seven Sister States.
# SENT:  Spread over 10,491.69 km2 (4,050.86 sq mi), Tripura is the third-smallest among the 29 states in the country, behind Goa and Sikkim.
# SENT:  Tripura is bordered by the country of Bangladesh to the west, north and south; and the Indian states of Assam to the north east; and Mizoram to the east.
# SENT:  : 4  The intervening synclines are the Agartala–Udaipur, Khowai–Teliamura, Kamalpur–Ambasa, Kailasahar–Manu and Dharmanagar–Kanchanpur valleys.
# SENT:  : 4  A number of rivers originate in the hills of Tripura and flow into Bangladesh.
# SENT:  Like most of the Indian subcontinent, Tripura lies within the Indomalayan realm.
# SENT:  Tripura hosts three different types of ecosystems: mountain, forest and freshwater.
# SENT:  The interspersion of bamboo and cane forests with deciduous and evergreen flora is a peculiarity of Tripura's vegetation.
# SENT:  Herbaceous plants, shrubs, and trees such as Albizia, Barringtonia, Lagerstroemia and Macaranga flourish in the swamps of Tripura.
# SENT:  Shrubs and grasses include Schumannianthus dichotoma (shitalpati), Phragmites and Saccharum (sugarcane).According to a survey in 1989–90, Tripura hosts 90 land mammal species from 65 genera and 10 orders, including such species as elephant (Elephas maximus), bear (Melursus ursinus), binturong (Arctictis binturong), wild dog (Cuon alpinus), porcupine (Artherurus assamensis), barking deer (Muntiacus muntjak), sambar (Cervus unicolor), wild boar (Sus scrofa), gaur (Bos gaurus), leopard (Panthera pardus), clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosa), and many species of small cats and primates.
# SENT:  Out of 15 free ranging primates of India, seven are found in Tripura; this is the highest number of primate species found in any Indian state.
# SENT:  In January 2012, major changes were implemented in the administrative divisions of Tripura.
# SENT:  There had previously been four districts – Dhalai (headquarters Ambassa), North Tripura (headquarters Kailashahar), South Tripura (headquarters Udaipur, Tripura), and West Tripura (headquarters Agartala).
# SENT:  Agartala, the capital of Tripura, is the most populous city.
# SENT:  Tripura is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy, a feature it shares with other Indian states.
# SENT:  The Tripura government has three branches: executive, legislature and judiciary.
# SENT:  The Tripura Legislative Assembly consists of elected members and special office bearers that are elected by the members.
# SENT:  The judiciary is composed of the Tripura High Court and a system of lower courts.
# SENT:  Tripura sends two representatives to the Lok Sabha (the lower house of the parliament of India) and one representative to the Rajya Sabha (parliament's upper house).
# SENT:  Tripura also has a unique tribal self-governance body, the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council.
# SENT:  In 1988–93, the Congress and Tripura Upajati Juba Samiti were in a ruling coalition.
# SENT:  In the 2013 Tripura Legislative Assembly election, the Left Front won 50 out of 60 seats in the Assembly.
# SENT:  : 362  It capitalised on the tribal dissatisfaction with the mainstream rulers,: 362  and has been noted for connection with the "sub-national or ethnic searches for identity".Since the 1990s, there has been an ongoing irredentist Tripura rebellion, involving militant outfits such as the National Liberation Front of Tripura and the All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF); terrorist incidents involving the ATTF claimed a recorded number of 389 victims in the seven-year period from 1993 to 2000.
# SENT:  The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 (AFSPA) was first enforced in Tripura on 16 February 1997 when terrorism was at its peak in the state.
# SENT:  However, in view of the improvement in the situation and fewer terrorist activities being reported, the Tripura government in June 2013 reduced operational areas of the AFSPA to 30 police station areas.
# SENT:  Tripura's gross state domestic product for 2022-23 was ₹640 billion (US$8.0 billion) at constant price (2022-23), recording 10.38% growth over the previous year.
# SENT:  According to the Economic Census of 2005, after agriculture, the maximum number of workers were engaged in retail trade (28.21% of total non-agricultural workforce), followed by manufacturing (18.60%), public administration (14.54%), and education (14.40%).Tripura is an agrarian state with more than half of the population dependent on agriculture and allied activities.
# SENT:  According to the Directorate of Economics & Statistics, Government of Tripura, in 2009–10, potato, sugarcane, mesta, pulses and jute were the other major crops cultivated in the state.
# SENT:  Maharaja Bir Bikram Airport, located 12 km northwest of Agartala at Singerbhil, is the second busiest airport in northeast India after Guwahati.
# SENT:  Agartala came on India's railway map with the advent of the railways in the subcontinent in 1853 but the link was broken when India was partitioned in 1947.
# SENT:  Railway service was established in Tripura in 1964 by constructing 1,000 mm (3 ft 3+3⁄8 in) metre gauge track from Lumding in Assam to Dharmanagar and Kailasahar in Tripura but the track did not connect the state capital Agartala.
# SENT:  Rail transport was absent in the state until 2008–09 when the railway track was extended to the capital Agartala.
# SENT:  The major railway stations in this line are in Agartala, Dharmanagar, and Kumarghat.
# SENT:  This metre gauge track was converted to 1,676 mm (5 ft 6 in) broad gauge in 2016 and now trains run from Agartala to Kolkata and Delhi.
# SENT:  The Agartala sabroom line was compled and fully operational since 2019.
# SENT:  A new railway line is being laid westwards from Agartala to Akhaura in Bangladesh.
# SENT:  This will reduce the distance between Agartala  and Kolkata   by over 1000 km and provide rail access to Chittagong port.
# PAGE:  https://hi.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E0%A4%85%E0%A4%97%E0%A4%B0%E0%A4%A4%E0%A4%B2%E0%A4%BE
# PAGE:  https://sco.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agartala
# SENT:  Agartala ( English: Bengali pronunciation: [agorot̪ɔla] (listen) ) is the capital and the largest city of the Indian state of Tripura, situated on the banks of Hoara River, about 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) east of the border with Bangladesh and about 2,499 km (1,52 mi) from the National Capital New Delhi.
# SENT:  According to 2022 census, Agartala is the third-most populous city in Northeast India with a population of about 5.7 lakh (0.57 million).
# SENT:  Agartala is a derivative of two words, namely agar, a valuable perfume and incense tree of genus Aquilaria, and the suffix tala, meaning underneath, a reference to the density of agarwood trees in the region.
# SENT:  in Agartala.In the past, Tripura served as the capital to several Hindu kingdoms.
# SENT:  In 1760 it was shifted by the Maharaja Krishna Chandra Manikya Bahadur (r.1829–1849) of Manikya Dynasty to present old Agartala by the bank of the river Haora/Saidra and was named 'Haveli'.
# SENT:  Due to frequent invasion of the Kukis and also to keep easy communication with the British Bengali, the Maharaja Krishna Chandra Manikya started the process of shifting the capital from Old Haveli to New Haveli (present Agartala) in 1849.During the British Raj, Agartala was the capital of the 'Hill Tippera' state; it became a municipality in 1874–75, and in 1901 had a population of 9,513.
# SENT:  The Agartala Municipality was established during the reign of Maharaja Bir Chandra Manikya (1862–1896) within an area of 3 square miles (8 km2) having a population of only 875 by a royal proclamation in the last part of 1871.
# SENT:  Power, the first British political agent for Tipperah was also appointed as the Chairman of the Agartala Municipality in 1872 who held office from 1872 to 1873.
# SENT:  The municipality located at the crossing of latitude N 23 –50' and longitude E 91-17' covering 3 km2 area during that period.Bir Bikram Kishore Debbarman is called the founder of the planned city of Agartala.
# SENT:  He had gone on a tour to the United Kingdom and was so impressed at the architecture that he started planning similar township in Agartala.
# SENT:  During the 1940s the town was re-organised in a planned manner with new roads and a market building.The estimated population of Agartala was 5,22,603 in 2014 after the municipal expansion (189,327 in the 2001 census).From 1901 to 1971 the city did not experience notable progress in infrastructure development with only an 8 km2 of area but 1981 saw Agartala expanding and increasing its connectivity as well as businesses in various fields, the city area expanding to 58.84 km2, greater Agartala is planned as of 2011 with an additional of 92 km2.
# SENT:  Agartala had a different type of history from the earlier times of the epic days as it was a princely state and was connected with Bangladesh.
# SENT:  The historical book Rajmala contains incidents and historical stories of Agartala.
# SENT:  Agartala is situated on a plain land along the Haora River, although the city also extends to the low-lying hills on its northern parts.Agartala has a monsoon influenced humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cwa) just short of being hot enough to qualify as a borderline tropical savanna (Aw)/tropical monsoon (Am) climate.
# SENT:  As of the 2011 Indian Census, Agartala had a total population of 400,004, of which 200,132 were males and 199,872 were females.
# SENT:  The total number of literates in Agartala was 344,711, which constituted 86.18% of the population with male literacy of 87.53% and female literacy of 84.82%.
# SENT:  The effective literacy rate of 7+ population of Agartala was 94.5%, of which male literacy rate was 96.2% and female literacy rate was 92.8%.
# SENT:  The sex ratio of Agartala is 999 females per 1,000 males.
# SENT:  In 1941 Agartala had a population of 17,693.
# SENT:  By 1991 the population had risen to 157,358.Bengali, the official state language, is the dominant language in Agartala spoken by 363,363 people, while English is also a popular language in the state; Kokborok is spoken by 16,200 people in the city.
# SENT:  The major areas where the Tripuri live are in the localities of Abhoynagar, Banamalipur, Krishnanagar, Nandannagar and Kunjaban areas who have started to mass migrate to Agartala from other parts of Tripura.
# SENT:  Agartala has emerged as one of the fastest-growing cities in the northeastern region of India today.
# SENT:  Agartala city consists of many paras, which means "locality" in Bengali.
# SENT:  Banamalipur is an important business centre and a part of urban Agartala, which falls under the Agartala post office.
# SENT:  This is one of the most peaceful temples in Agartala.
# SENT:  The place along with its object is a unique icon of Agartala.Krishnanagar is one of the most densely populated parts of the city.
# SENT:  It encompasses  the most visited temples of Agartala like Jagannnatha temple, Laxminarayana temple, Durgabari temple and Alpkhbaba temple.
# SENT:  Joynagar is another a locality in Agartala which has six lanes.
# SENT:  It is surrounded by some localities and quarter complexes of many government employees.MBB Club, Indranagar, Bholagiri and Bhati Abhoynagar are some residential places in the city.79 Tilla is another important part of Agartala with major offices such as the BSNL Office, electric office, Geological Survey office and Quarters, and the AG Quarters.
# SENT:  The Agartala Government Medical College is located here.Amtali, Badhar Ghat, College Tilla, Jagaharimura, Lake Chowmuhani, Advisor Chowmuhani, Ganaraj Chowmuhani, Durjoynagar, Bardowali are some important places in the city.Battala is the commercial area of the city, it is often called Bottala in Bengali and is also known as the electronics market of Agartala.
# SENT:  Melarmath Kali Bari temple is one of the widely known temples of Agartala.Khayerpur and Chandrapur are located on the National Highway 8.These areas are subdivided into residential blocks, such as Banamalipur which is divided into North Banamalipur, Madhya Banamlipur, South Banamalipur, etc.From 2004 the Agartala Municipal Council has been further extended, taking 16 villages of Dukli R. D. Block, seven villages of Mohanpur R. D. Block and two villages of Jirania R. D. Block with area of 43 km2 and 178,495 population in addition to the 16 km2 and population of 200,000 in the 2001 census.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:9, WORD1_SENTS:46, WORD2_SENTS:41
# WORDPAIR: China Asia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/China
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/East_Asia
# SENT:  East Asia is the eastern region of Asia, which is defined in both geographical and ethno-cultural terms.
# SENT:  The modern states of East Asia include China, Japan, Mongolia, North Korea, South Korea, and Taiwan.
# SENT:  China, North Korea, South Korea and Taiwan are all unrecognised by at least one other East Asian state because of severe ongoing political tensions in the region, specifically the division of Korea and the political status of Taiwan.
# SENT:  Hong Kong and Macau, two small coastal quasi-dependent territories located in the south of China, are officially highly autonomous but are under Chinese sovereignty.
# SENT:  Japan, Taiwan, South Korea, Mainland China, Hong Kong, and Macau are among the world's largest and most prosperous economies.
# SENT:  East Asia borders Siberia and the Russian Far East to the north, Southeast Asia to the south, South Asia to the southwest, and Central Asia to the west.
# SENT:  East Asia, especially Chinese civilization, is regarded as one of the earliest cradles of civilization.
# SENT:  Other ancient civilizations in East Asia that still exist as independent countries in the present day include the Japanese, Korean and Mongolian civilizations.
# SENT:  Various other civilizations existed as independent polities in East Asia in the past but have since been absorbed into neighbouring civilizations in the present day, such as Tibet, Baiyue, Khitan, Manchuria, Ryukyu (Okinawa) and Ainu among many others.
# SENT:  Taiwan has a relatively young history in the region after the prehistoric era; originally, it was a major site of Austronesian civilization prior to colonisation by European colonial powers and China from the 17th century onward.
# SENT:  For thousands of years, China was the leading civilization in the region, exerting influence on its neighbours.
# SENT:  Historically, societies in East Asia have fallen within the Chinese sphere of influence, and East Asian vocabulary and scripts are often derived from Classical Chinese and Chinese script.
# SENT:  The Chinese calendar serves as the root from which many other East Asian calendars are derived.
# SENT:  Major religions in East Asia include Buddhism (mostly Mahayana), Confucianism and Neo-Confucianism, Taoism, Ancestral worship, and Chinese folk religion in Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, Shinto in Japan, and Christianity, and  Musok in Korea.
# SENT:  Tengerism and Tibetan Buddhism are prevalent among Mongols and Tibetans while other religions such as Shamanism are widespread among the indigenous populations of northeastern China such as the Manchus.
# SENT:  Major languages in East Asia include Mandarin Chinese, Japanese, and Korean.
# SENT:  Major ethnic groups of East Asia include the Han (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan), Yamato (Japan) and Koreans (North Korea, South Korea).
# SENT:  There are 76 officially-recognised minority or indigenous ethnic groups in East Asia; 55 native to mainland China (including Hui, Manchus, Chinese Mongols, Tibetans, Uyghurs and Zhuang in the frontier regions), 16 native to the island of Taiwan (collectively known as Taiwanese indigenous peoples), one native to the major Japanese island of Hokkaido (the Ainu) and four native to Mongolia (Turkic peoples).
# SENT:  There are also several unrecognised indigenous ethnic groups in mainland China and Taiwan.
# SENT:  East Asian people comprise around 1.7 billion people, making up about 38% of the population in Continental Asia and 20.5% of the global population.
# SENT:  Although the coastal and riparian areas of the region form one of the world's most populated places, the population in Mongolia and Western China, both landlocked areas, is very sparsely distributed, with Mongolia having the lowest population density of a sovereign state.
# SENT:  China was the first region settled in East Asia and was undoubtedly the core of East Asian civilization from where other parts of East Asia were formed.
# SENT:  The various other regions in East Asia were selective in the Chinese influences they adopted into their local customs.
# SENT:  Chinese civilization existed for about 1500 years before other East Asian civilizations emerged into history, Imperial China would exert much of its cultural, economic, technological, and political muscle onto its neighbours.
# SENT:  Succeeding Chinese dynasties exerted enormous influence across East Asia culturally, economically, politically and militarily for over two millennia.
# SENT:  The Imperial Chinese tributary system shaped much of East Asia's history for over two millennia due to Imperial China's economic and cultural influence over the region, and thus played a huge role in the history of East Asia in particular.
# SENT:  Imperial China's cultural preeminence not only led the country to become East Asia's first literate nation in the entire region, it also supplied Japan and Korea with Chinese loanwords and linguistic influences rooted in their writing systems.Under Emperor Wu of Han, the Han dynasty made China the regional power in East Asia, projecting much of its imperial power on its neighbours.
# SENT:  Han China hosted the largest unified population in East Asia, the most literate and urbanised as well as being the most economically developed, as well as the most technologically and culturally advanced civilization in the region at the time.
# SENT:  Cultural and religious interaction between the Chinese and other regional East Asian dynasties and kingdoms occurred.
# SENT:  China's impact and influence on Korea began with the Han dynasty's northeastern expansion in 108 BC when the Han Chinese conquered the northern part of the Korean peninsula and established a province called Lelang.
# SENT:  During the Tang dynasty, China exerted its greatest influence on East Asia as various aspects of Chinese culture spread to Japan and Korea.
# SENT:  As full-fledged medieval East Asian states were established, Korea by the fourth century AD and Japan by the seventh century AD, Japan and Korea actively began to incorporate Chinese influences such as Confucianism, the use of written Han characters, Chinese style architecture, state institutions, political philosophies, religion, urban planning, and various scientific and technological methods into their culture and society through direct contacts with Tang China and succeeding Chinese dynasties.
# SENT:  For many centuries, most notably from the 7th to the 14th centuries, China stood as East Asia's most advanced civilization and foremost military and economic power exerting its influence as the transmission of advanced Chinese cultural practices and ways of thinking greatly shaped the region up until the nineteenth century.As East Asia's connections with Europe and the Western world strengthened during the late nineteenth century, China's power began to decline.
# SENT:  Around the same time, Japan with its rush to modernity transformed itself from an isolated feudal samurai state into East Asia's first industrialised nation in the modern era.
# SENT:  The modern and militarily powerful Japan would galvanise its position in the Orient as East Asia's greatest power with a global mission poised to advance to lead the entire world.
# SENT:  By the early 1900s, the Japanese empire succeeded in asserting itself as East Asia's most dominant power.
# SENT:  With its newly found international status, Japan would begin to challenge the European colonial powers and inextricably took on a more active geopolitical position in East Asia and world affairs at large.
# SENT:  Flexing its nascent political and military might, Japan soundly defeated the stagnant Qing dynasty during the First Sino-Japanese War as well as vanquishing imperial rival Russia in 1905; the first major military victory in the modern era of an East Asian power over a European one.
# SENT:  During World War II, Japanese expansionism with its imperialist aspirations through the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere would incorporate Korea, Taiwan, much of eastern China and Manchuria, Hong Kong, and Southeast Asia under its control establishing itself as a maritime colonial power in East Asia.
# SENT:  After a century of exploitation by the European and Japanese colonialists, post-colonial East Asia saw the defeat and occupation of Japan by the victorious Allies as well as the division of China and Korea during the Cold War.
# SENT:  The Korean peninsula became independent but then it was divided into two rival states, while Taiwan became the main territory of de facto state Republic of China after the latter lost Mainland China to the People's Republic of China in the Chinese Civil War.
# SENT:  East Asia would also see the economic rise of Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan, and the integration of Mainland China into the global economy through its entry in the World Trade Organization while enhancing its emerging international status as a potential world power.
# SENT:  Although there have been no wars in East Asia for decades, the stability of the region remains fragile because of North Korea's nuclear program.
# SENT:  In common usage, the term "East Asia" typically refers to a region including Greater China, Japan, and Korea.China, Japan, and Korea (including North and South) represent the three core countries and civilizations of traditional East Asia - as they once shared a common written language, culture, as well as sharing Confucian philosophical tenets and the Confucian societal value system once instituted by Imperial China.
# SENT:  Other usages define Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, and Taiwan; as countries that constitute East Asia based on their geographic proximity as well as historical and modern cultural and economic ties, particularly with Japan and Korea having strong cultural influences that originated from China.
# SENT:  Few people include Vietnam ie Southeast Asian country as part of East Asia as it is always considered part of the Chinese cultural sphere; Northern Vietnam (including Hanoi) has subtropical climate and significant part of Vietnam has times to be influenced by cold waves, which also differs from other countries of Southeast Asia.
# SENT:  Mongolia is geographically north of Mainland China, yet Confucianism and the Chinese writing system and culture had limited impact on Mongolian society.
# SENT:  Thus, Mongolia is sometimes grouped with Central Asian countries such as Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan.
# SENT:  Xinjiang (East Turkestan) and Tibet are sometimes seen as part of Central Asia.Broader and looser definitions by international organisations such as the World Bank refer to East Asia as the "three major Northeast Asian economies, i.e.
# SENT:  Mainland China, Japan, and South Korea", as well as Mongolia, North Korea, the Russian Far East, and Siberia.
# SENT:  The Economic Research Institute for Northeast Asia defines the region as "China, Japan, the Koreas, Nepal, Mongolia, and eastern regions of the Russian Federation".
# SENT:  The UNSD definition of East Asia is based on statistical convenience, but others commonly use the same definition of Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, Mongolia, North Korea, South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan.Certain Japanese islands are associated with Oceania due to non-continental geology, distance from mainland Asia or biogeographical similarities with Micronesia.
# SENT:  Some groups, such as the World Health Organization, categorize China, Japan and Korea with Australia and the rest of Oceania.
# SENT:  The World Health Organization label this region the "Western Pacific", with East Asia not being used in their concept of major world regions.
# SENT:  In business and economics, "East Asia" is sometimes used to refer to the geographical area covering ten Southeast Asian countries in ASEAN, Greater China, Japan and Korea.
# SENT:  However, in this context, the term "Far East" is used by the Europeans to cover ASEAN countries and the countries in East Asia.
# SENT:  However, being a Eurocentric term, Far East describes the region's geographical position in relation to Europe rather than its location within Asia.
# SENT:  Alternatively, the term "Asia Pacific Region" is often used in describing East Asia, Southeast Asia as well as Oceania.
# SENT:  On rare occasion, the term is also sometimes taken to include India and other South Asian countries not within the bounds of the Pacific, although the term Indo-Pacific is more commonly used for such a definition.Observers preferring a broader definition of "East Asia" often use the term Northeast Asia to refer to China, the Korean Peninsula, and Japan, with Southeast Asia covering the ten ASEAN countries.
# SENT:  This usage, which is seen in economic and diplomatic discussions, is at odds with the historical meanings of both "East Asia" and "Northeast Asia".
# SENT:  The Council on Foreign Relations of the United States defines Northeast Asia as Japan and Korea.
# SENT:  Note: The order of states/territories follows the population ranking of each ethnicity, within East Asia only.
# SENT:  The culture of East Asia has largely been influenced by China, as it was the civilization that had the most dominant influence in the region throughout the ages that ultimately laid the foundation for East Asian civilization.
# SENT:  Imperial China served as a vehicle through which the adoption of Confucian ethical philosophy, Chinese calendar system, political and legal systems, architectural style, diet, terminology, institutions, religious beliefs, imperial examinations that emphasised a knowledge of Chinese classics, political philosophy and cultural value systems, as well as historically sharing a common writing system reflected in the histories of Japan and Korea.
# SENT:  The Imperial Chinese tributary system was the bedrock of network of trade and foreign relations between China and its East Asian tributaries, which helped to shape much of East Asian affairs during the ancient and medieval eras.
# SENT:  Through the tributary system, the various dynasties of Imperial China facilitated frequent economic and cultural exchange that influenced the cultures of Japan and Korea and drew them into a Chinese international order.
# SENT:  The Imperial Chinese tributary system shaped much of East Asia's foreign policy and trade for over two millennia due to Imperial China's economic and cultural dominance over the region, and thus played a huge role in the history of East Asia in particular.
# SENT:  The relationship between China and its cultural influence on East Asia has been compared to the historical influence of Greco-Roman civilization on Europe and the Western World.
# SENT:  Church, Peter.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Chinese_Central_Asia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Asia
# SENT:  The civilizations in Mesopotamia, India, and China shared many similarities and likely exchanged technologies and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel.
# SENT:  Another major advancement was the innovation of gunpowder in medieval China, later developed by the Gunpowder empires, mainly by the Mughals and Safavids, which led to advanced warfare through the use of guns.
# SENT:  The prehistoric Beifudi site near Yixian in Hebei Province, China, contains relics of a culture contemporaneous with the Cishan and Xinglongwa cultures of about 8000–7000 BC, neolithic cultures east of the Taihang Mountains, filling in an archaeological gap between the two Northern Chinese cultures.
# SENT:  This was the basis for the Vedic religion, which would eventually sophisticate and develop into Hinduism.China and Vietnam were also centres of metalworking.
# SENT:  Dating back to the Neolithic Age, the first bronze drums, called the Dong Son drums have been uncovered in and around the Red River Delta regions of Vietnam and Southern China.
# SENT:  Since 1029 BC, the Zhou dynasty (Chinese: 周朝; pinyin: Zhōu Cháo; Wade–Giles: Chou Ch'ao [tʂóʊ tʂʰɑ̌ʊ]), had existed in China and it would continue to until 258 BC.
# SENT:  The Qin dynasty (Chinese: 秦朝; pinyin: Qín Cháo) was the first ruling dynasty of Imperial China, lasting from 221 to 207 BC.
# SENT:  Huang's imperial forces crushed any regional resistance, and they furthered the Chinese empire by expanding down to the South China Sea and northern Vietnam.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:28, WORD1_SENTS:22, WORD2_SENTS:28
# WORDPAIR: India Delhi
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delhi
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Delhi
# SENT:  New Delhi ( (listen), Hindi: [ˈnəiː ˈdɪlːiː], Naī Dillī) is the capital of India and a part of the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT).
# SENT:  New Delhi is the seat of all three branches of the government of India, hosting the Rashtrapati Bhavan, Parliament House, and the Supreme Court of India.
# SENT:  New Delhi is a municipality within the NCT, administered by the NDMC, which covers mostly Lutyens' Delhi and a few adjacent areas.
# SENT:  The municipal area is part of a larger administrative district, the New Delhi district.
# SENT:  Although colloquially Delhi and New Delhi are used interchangeably to refer to the National Capital Territory of Delhi, both are distinct entities, with both the municipality and the New Delhi district forming a relatively small part of the megacity of Delhi.
# SENT:  The foundation stone of New Delhi was laid by George V during the Delhi Durbar of 1911.
# SENT:  Until December 1911 Calcutta was the capital of India during the British Rule.
# SENT:  The anti-colonial sentiments amongst the public led to a complete boycott of British goods, which forced the colonial government to reunite Bengal and immediately shift the capital to New Delhi.Old Delhi had served as the political and financial centre of several empires of ancient India and the Delhi Sultanate, most notably of the Mughal Empire from 1649 to 1857.
# SENT:  During the early 1900s, a proposal was made to the British administration to shift the capital of the British Indian Empire, as India was officially named, from Calcutta on the east coast, to Delhi.
# SENT:  The Government of British India felt that it would be logistically easier to administer India from Delhi, which is in the centre of northern India.
# SENT:  The land for building the new city of Delhi was acquired under the Land Acquisition Act 1894.
# SENT:  During the Delhi Durbar on 12 December 1911, George V, Emperor of India, while laying the foundation stone for the viceroy's residence in the Coronation Park, Kingsway Camp, declared that the capital of the Raj would be shifted from Calcutta to Delhi.
# SENT:  Three days later, George V and his consort, Queen Mary, laid the foundation stone of New Delhi at Kingsway Camp.
# SENT:  Large parts of New Delhi were planned by Edwin Lutyens, who first visited Delhi in 1912, and Herbert Baker, both leading 20th-century British architects.
# SENT:  The original plan called for its construction in Tughlaqabad, inside the Tughlaqabad Fort, but this was given up because of the Delhi-Calcutta trunk line that passed through the fort.
# SENT:  The city that was later dubbed "Lutyens' Delhi" was inaugurated in ceremonies beginning on 10 February 1931 by Viceroy Lord Irwin.
# SENT:  Indeed, the Delhi Town Planning Committee, set up to plan the new imperial capital, with George Swinton as chairman, and John A. Brodie and Lutyens as members, submitted reports for both north and south sites.
# SENT:  The central axis of New Delhi, which today faces east at India Gate, was previously meant to be a north–south axis linking the Viceroy's House at one end with Paharganj at the other.
# SENT:  The reason for this choice was that the hill lay directly opposite the Dinapanah citadel, which was also considered the site of Indraprastha, the ancient region of Delhi.
# SENT:  Subsequently, the foundation stone was shifted from the site of Delhi Durbar of 1911–1912, where the Coronation Pillar stood, and embedded in the walls of the forecourt of the Secretariat.
# SENT:  The Rajpath, also known as King's Way, stretched from the India Gate to the Rashtrapati Bhawan.
# SENT:  The Secretariat building, the two blocks of which flank the Rashtrapati Bhawan and houses ministries of the government of India, and the Parliament House, both designed by Baker, are located at the Sansad Marg and run parallel to the Rajpath.
# SENT:  Before construction could begin on the rocky ridge of Raisina Hill, a circular railway line around the Council House (now Parliament House), called the Imperial Delhi Railway, was built to transport construction material and workers for the next twenty years.
# SENT:  The last stumbling block was the Agra-Delhi railway line that cut right through the site earmarked for the hexagonal All-India War Memorial (India Gate) and Kingsway (Rajpath), which was a problem because the Old Delhi Railway Station served the entire city at that time.
# SENT:  The New Delhi Railway Station opened in 1926, with a single platform at Ajmeri Gate near Paharganj, and was completed in time for the city's inauguration in 1931.
# SENT:  As construction of the Viceroy's House (the present Rashtrapati Bhavan), Central Secretariat, Parliament House, and All-India War Memorial (India Gate) was winding down, the building of a shopping district and a new plaza, Connaught Place, began in 1929, and was completed by 1933.
# SENT:  Named after Prince Arthur, 1st Duke of Connaught (1850–1942), it was designed by Robert Tor Russell, chief architect to the Public Works Department (PWD).After the capital of India moved to Delhi, a temporary secretariat building was constructed in a few months in 1912 in North Delhi.
# SENT:  Most of the government offices of the new capital moved here from the 'Old secretariat' in Old Delhi (the building now houses the Delhi Legislative Assembly), a decade before the new capital was inaugurated in 1931.
# SENT:  Many employees were brought into the new capital from distant parts of India, including the Bengal Presidency and Madras Presidency.
# SENT:  After India gained independence in 1947, limited autonomy was conferred to New Delhi and was administered by a Chief Commissioner appointed by the Government of India.
# SENT:  In 1966, Delhi was converted into a union territory and eventually the Chief Commissioner was replaced by a Lieutenant Governor.
# SENT:  The Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 declared the Union Territory of Delhi to be formally known as National Capital Territory of Delhi.
# SENT:  The first major extension of New Delhi outside of Lutyens' Delhi came in the 1950s when the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) developed a large area of land southwest of Lutyens' Delhi to create the diplomatic enclave of Chanakyapuri, where land was allotted for embassies, chanceries, high commissions and residences of ambassadors, around a wide central vista, Shanti Path.
# SENT:  With a total area of 42.7 km2 (16.5 sq mi), the municipality of New Delhi forms a small part of the Delhi metropolitan area.
# SENT:  New Delhi and surrounding areas were once a part of the Aravali Range; all that is left of those mountains is the Delhi Ridge, which is also called the Lungs of Delhi.
# SENT:  While New Delhi lies on the floodplains of the Yamuna River, it is essentially a landlocked city.
# SENT:  New Delhi falls under the seismic zone-IV, making it vulnerable to earthquakes.
# SENT:  The climate of New Delhi is a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen BSh) bordering on a dry-winter humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cwa) with high variation between summer and winter in terms of both temperature and rainfall.
# SENT:  New Delhi's highest temperature ever recorded is 49.2 °C (120.6 °F) on 15 May 2022 at Met Delhi Mungeshpur while the lowest temperature ever recorded is −2.2 °C (28.0 °F) on 11 January 1967 at Indira Gandhi International Airport (formerly known as Palam Airport).
# SENT:  In Mercer's 2015 annual quality-of-living survey, New Delhi ranks at number 154 out of 230 cities due to bad air quality and pollution.
# SENT:  The World Health Organization ranked New Delhi as the world's worst polluted city in 2014 among about 1,600 cities the organisation tracked around the world.
# SENT:  In 2016, United States Environmental Protection Agency listed New Delhi as the most polluted city on Earth and IQAir listed New Delhi as the world's most polluted capital city for the second straight year in year 2019.
# SENT:  In an attempt to lessen air pollution in New Delhi, which gets worse during the winter, a temporary alternate-day travel scheme for cars using the odd- and even-numbered licence plates system was announced by Delhi government in December 2015.
# SENT:  In addition, trucks were to be allowed to enter India's capital only after 11 pm, two hours later than the existing restriction.
# SENT:  Public transportation service was increased during the restriction period.On 16 December 2015, the Supreme Court of India mandated several restrictions on Delhi's transportation system to curb pollution.
# SENT:  The court also ordered all taxis in the Delhi region to switch to compressed natural gas by 1 March 2016.
# SENT:  Transportation vehicles that are more than 10 years old were banned from entering the capital.Analysing real-time vehicle speed data from Uber Delhi revealed that during the odd-even program, average speeds went up by a statistically significant 5.4 per cent (2.8 standard deviation from normal).
# SENT:  In bordering areas, PM 2.5 levels were recorded more than 400 (ug/m3) while in inner areas in Delhi, they were recorded between 150 and 210 on an average.
# SENT:  At the NSIT University campus, located in sector 3 Dwarka, pollution levels were as low as 93 PPM.On 7 November 2017, the Indian Medical Association declared a public health emergency due to high pollution levels.
# SENT:  Levels of PM2.5 were recorded at 710 μg/m3, more than 11 times the World Health Organization's safe limit.In a 2018 study, New Delhi was found to be the most polluted capital out of 61 capital cities around the world.In December 2019, IIT Bombay, in partnership with the McKelvey School of Engineering of Washington University in St. Louis, launched the Aerosol and Air Quality Research Facility to study air pollution in New Delhi, among other Indian cities.During the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in India, The water quality of the Yamuna and Ganges river basins have improved as industries are closed due to the lockdown.
# SENT:  The air quality has also significantly improved during the lockdown.On 5 November 2020, New Delhi recorded its most toxic day in a year, as the concentration of poisonous PM2.5 particles was recorded at 14 times the WHO's safe limit.
# SENT:  As of 2011, the New Delhi Municipal Council area has a population of 249,998.
# SENT:  Hindi is the most widely spoken language in New Delhi and the lingua franca of the city.
# SENT:  New Delhi has a literacy rate of 89.38% according to 2011 census, which is the highest in Delhi.
# SENT:  According to 2011 census, Hinduism is the religion of 89.8% of New Delhi's population.
# SENT:  The national capital of India, New Delhi is jointly administered by both the Central Government of India and the local Government of Delhi, it is also the capital of the National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi.
# SENT:  New Delhi is administered through a municipal government, known as the New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC).
# SENT:  New Delhi is the largest commercial city in northern India.
# SENT:  As of 2013, the per capita income of Delhi was Rs.230000, second highest in India after Goa.
# SENT:  GSDP in Delhi at the prices for 2012–13 is estimated at Rs 3.88 trillion (short scale) against Rs 3.11 trillion (short scale) in 2011–12.Connaught Place, one of North India's largest commercial and financial centres, is located in the northern part of New Delhi.
# SENT:  New Delhi's per capita GDP (at PPP) was at $6,860 during 2009–10 fiscal, making it one of the richest cities in India.
# SENT:  New Delhi is a cosmopolitan city due to the multi-ethnic and multi-cultural presence of the vast Indian bureaucracy and political system.
# SENT:  National events such as Republic Day, Independence Day and Gandhi Jayanti (Gandhi's birthday) are celebrated with great enthusiasm in New Delhi and the rest of India.
# SENT:  On India's Independence Day (15 August), the Prime Minister of India addresses the nation from the Red Fort.
# SENT:  The Republic Day Parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India's cultural diversity and military might.Religious festivals include Diwali (the festival of light), Maha Shivaratri, Teej, Durga Puja, Mahavir Jayanti, Guru Nanak Jayanti, Holi, Lohri, Eid ul-Fitr, Eid ul-Adha, Easter, Raksha Bandhan, and Christmas.
# SENT:  The Qutub Festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over India are showcased at night, with the Qutub Minar as the chosen backdrop of the event.
# SENT:  The National Museum, which began with an exhibition of Indian art and artefacts at the Royal Academy in London in the winter of 1947–48, was later at the end was shown at the Rashtrapati Bhawan in 1949.
# SENT:  On 15 August 1949, the National Museum was formally inaugurated and has 200,000 works of art, both of Indian and foreign origin, covering over 5,000 years.The India Gate, which was built in 1931, was inspired by the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
# SENT:  It is the national monument of India commemorating the 90,000 soldiers of the Indian Army who died while fighting for the British Raj in World War I and the Third Anglo-Afghan War.
# SENT:  The Rajpath, which was built similar to the Champs-Élysées in Paris, is the ceremonial boulevard for the Republic of India, located in New Delhi.
# SENT:  and Supreme Court of India Museum,In the coming years, a new National War Memorial and Museum will be constructed in New Delhi for ₹4,000 million (US$50 million).New Delhi is particularly renowned for its beautifully landscaped gardens that can look quite stunning in spring.
# SENT:  In addition, there are the gardens in the Presidential Estate, the gardens along the Rajpath and India Gate, the gardens along Shanti Path, the Rose Garden, Nehru Park and the Railway Garden in Chanakya Puri.
# SENT:  The New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) area was declared the cleanest in North India, based on solid waste management, access to sanitation and other parameters of cleanliness, under the zone-wise Swachh Survekshan 2017.
# SENT:  Terminal 3, which cost ₹96.8 billion (US$1.2 billion) to construct between 2007 and 2010, handles an additional 37 million passengers annually.The Delhi Flying Club, established in 1928 with two de Havilland Moth aircraft named Delhi and Roshanara, was based at Safdarjung Airport which started operations in 1929, when it was the Delhi's only airport and the second in India.
# SENT:  Delhi Airport also bags two awards for The Best Airport in Central Asia/India and Best Airport Staff in Central Asia/India at the Skytrax World Airport Awards 2015.
# SENT:  New Delhi has one of India's largest bus transport systems.
# SENT:  New Delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in India.
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delhi
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Delhi
# SENT:  Delhi has a long history, and has been an important political centre of India as the capital of several empires.
# SENT:  It is considered to be a city built, destroyed and rebuilt several times, as outsiders who successfully invaded the Indian Subcontinent would ransack the existing capital city in Delhi, and those who came to conquer and stay would be so impressed by the city's strategic location as to make it their capital and rebuild it in their own way.In the medieval era, Delhi was ruled by the Tomara dynasty and Chauhan from 736 to 1193.
# SENT:  The Delhi Sultanate is the name given for a series of five successive dynasties, which remained as a dominant power of Indian subcontinent with Delhi as their capital.
# SENT:  In 1803, Delhi was captured by the British East India Company.
# SENT:  During Company Rule in India, the Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah II was reduced to merely a figurehead.
# SENT:  The Indian Rebellion of 1857 sought to end company rule and declared Bahadur Shah II the Emperor of India.
# SENT:  This also marked the beginning of direct British Rule in India.
# SENT:  In 1911, the capital of British India was shifted from Calcutta to New Delhi, the last inner city of Delhi designed by Edwin Lutyens.
# SENT:  After India's Independence from the British, New Delhi became the capital of the newly formed Republic of India.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:33, WORD1_SENTS:17, WORD2_SENTS:37
# WORDPAIR: Europe Euro
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euro
# SENT:  Europe is a continent which is part of Eurasia and is located entirely in the Northern Hemisphere and mostly in the Eastern Hemisphere.
# SENT:  Europe is commonly considered to be separated from Asia by the watershed of the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, the Caspian Sea, the Greater Caucasus, the Black Sea and the waterways of the Turkish Straits.Europe covers about 10.18 million km2 (3.93 million sq mi), or 2% of Earth's surface (6.8% of land area), making it the second-smallest continent (using the seven-continent model).
# SENT:  Politically, Europe is divided into about fifty sovereign states, of which Russia is the largest and most populous, spanning 39% of the continent and comprising 15% of its population.
# SENT:  Europe had a total population of about 745 million (about 10% of the world population) in 2021.
# SENT:  The European climate is largely affected by warm Atlantic currents that temper winters and summers on much of the continent, even at latitudes along which the climate in Asia and North America is severe.
# SENT:  European culture is the root of Western civilisation, which traces its lineage back to ancient Greece and ancient Rome.
# SENT:  The fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE and the related Migration Period marked the end of Europe's ancient history, and the beginning of the Middle Ages.
# SENT:  Since the Age of Discovery, started by Spain and Portugal, Europe played a predominant role in global affairs.
# SENT:  Between the 16th and 20th centuries, European powers colonised at various times the Americas, almost all of Africa and Oceania, and the majority of Asia.
# SENT:  The Industrial Revolution, which began in Great Britain at the end of the 18th century, gave rise to radical economic, cultural and social change in Western Europe and eventually the wider world.
# SENT:  Both world wars took place for the most part in Europe, contributing to a decline in Western European dominance in world affairs by the mid-20th century as the Soviet Union and the United States took prominence.
# SENT:  During the Cold War, Europe was divided along the Iron Curtain between NATO in the West and the Warsaw Pact in the East, until the Revolutions of 1989, Fall of the Berlin Wall and the Dissolution of the Soviet Union.
# SENT:  In 1949, the Council of Europe was founded with the idea of unifying Europe to achieve common goals and prevent future wars.
# SENT:  Further European integration by some states led to the formation of the European Union (EU), a separate political entity that lies between a confederation and a federation.
# SENT:  The EU originated in Western Europe but has been expanding eastward since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991.
# SENT:  The currency of most countries of the European Union, the euro, is the most commonly used among Europeans; and the EU's Schengen Area abolishes border and immigration controls between most of its member states, and some non-member states.
# SENT:  There exists a political movement favouring the evolution of the European Union into a single federation encompassing much of the continent.
# SENT:  In classical Greek mythology, Europa (Ancient Greek: Εὐρώπη, Eurṓpē) was a Phoenician princess.
# SENT:  Broad has been an epithet of Earth herself in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion and the poetry devoted to it.
# SENT:  An alternative view is that of Robert Beekes, who has argued in favour of a Pre-Indo-European origin for the name, explaining that a derivation from eurus would yield a different toponym than Europa.
# SENT:  Beekes has located toponyms related to that of Europa in the territory of ancient Greece, and localities such as that of Europos in ancient Macedonia.There have been attempts to connect Eurṓpē to a Semitic term for west, this being either Akkadian erebu meaning 'to go down, set' (said of the sun) or Phoenician 'ereb 'evening, west', which is at the origin of Arabic maghreb and Hebrew ma'arav.
# SENT:  Martin Litchfield West stated that "phonologically, the match between Europa's name and any form of the Semitic word is very poor", while Beekes considers a connection to Semitic languages improbable.Most major world languages use words derived from Eurṓpē or Europa to refer to the continent.
# SENT:  Chinese, for example, uses the word Ōuzhōu (歐洲/欧洲), which is an abbreviation of the transliterated name Ōuluóbā zhōu (歐羅巴洲) (zhōu means "continent"); a similar Chinese-derived term Ōshū (欧州) is also sometimes used in Japanese such as in the Japanese name of the European Union, Ōshū Rengō (欧州連合), despite the katakana Yōroppa (ヨーロッパ) being more commonly used.
# SENT:  In some Turkic languages, the originally Persian name Frangistan ('land of the Franks') is used casually in referring to much of Europe, besides official names such as Avrupa or Evropa.
# SENT:  The prevalent definition of Europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid-19th century.
# SENT:  Europe is taken to be bounded by large bodies of water to the north, west and south; Europe's limits to the east and north-east are usually taken to be the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, and the Caspian Sea; to the south-east, the Caucasus Mountains, the Black Sea, and the waterways connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea.
# SENT:  Islands are generally grouped with the nearest continental landmass, hence Iceland is considered to be part of Europe, while the nearby island of Greenland is usually assigned to North America, although politically belonging to Denmark.
# SENT:  Cyprus is closest to Anatolia (or Asia Minor), but is considered part of Europe politically and it is a member state of the EU.
# SENT:  Malta was considered an island of North-western Africa for centuries, but now it is considered to be part of Europe as well.
# SENT:  "Europe", as used specifically in British English, may also refer to Continental Europe exclusively.The term "continent" usually implies the physical geography of a large land mass completely or almost completely surrounded by water at its borders.
# SENT:  Prior to the adoption of the current convention that includes mountain divides, the border between Europe and Asia had been redefined several times since its first conception in classical antiquity, but always as a series of rivers, seas and straits that were believed to extend an unknown distance east and north from the Mediterranean Sea without the inclusion of any mountain ranges.
# SENT:  Cartographer Herman Moll suggested in 1715 Europe was bounded by a series of partly-joined waterways directed towards the Turkish straits, and the Irtysh River draining into the upper part of the Ob River and the Arctic Ocean.
# SENT:  In contrast, the present eastern boundary of Europe partially adheres to the Ural and Caucasus Mountains, which is somewhat arbitrary and inconsistent compared to any clear-cut definition of the term "continent".
# SENT:  The geographic border between Europe and Asia does not follow any state boundaries and now only follows a few bodies of water.
# SENT:  France, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom are also transcontinental (or more properly, intercontinental, when oceans or large seas are involved) in that their main land areas are in Europe while pockets of their territories are located on other continents separated from Europe by large bodies of water.
# SENT:  Anaximander placed the boundary between Asia and Europe along the Phasis River (the modern Rioni River on the territory of Georgia) in the Caucasus, a convention still followed by Herodotus in the 5th century BCE.
# SENT:  Herodotus mentioned that the world had been divided by unknown persons into three parts—Europe, Asia, and Libya (Africa)—with the Nile and the Phasis forming their boundaries—though he also states that some considered the River Don, rather than the Phasis, as the boundary between Europe and Asia.
# SENT:  Europe's eastern frontier was defined in the 1st century by geographer Strabo at the River Don.
# SENT:  The Book of Jubilees described the continents as the lands given by Noah to his three sons; Europe was defined as stretching from the Pillars of Hercules at the Strait of Gibraltar, separating it from Northwest Africa, to the Don, separating it from Asia.The convention received by the Middle Ages and surviving into modern usage is that of the Roman era used by Roman-era authors such as Posidonius, Strabo and Ptolemy, who took the Tanais (the modern Don River) as the boundary.
# SENT:  However, following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the culture that developed in its place, linked to Latin and the Catholic church, began to associate itself with the concept of "Europe".
# SENT:  The term "Europe" is first used for a cultural sphere in the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century.
# SENT:  A cultural definition of Europe as the lands of Latin Christendom coalesced in the 8th century, signifying the new cultural condominium created through the confluence of Germanic traditions and Christian-Latin culture, defined partly in contrast with Byzantium and Islam, and limited to northern Iberia, the British Isles, France, Christianised western Germany, the Alpine regions and northern and central Italy.
# SENT:  The concept is one of the lasting legacies of the Carolingian Renaissance: Europa often figures in the letters of Charlemagne's court scholar, Alcuin.
# SENT:  The transition of Europe to being a cultural term as well as a geographic one led to the borders of Europe being affected by cultural considerations in the East, especially relating to areas under Byzantine, Ottoman, and Russian influence.
# SENT:  Such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term Europe by its users.
# SENT:  Such cultural considerations were not applied to the Americas, despite their conquest and settlement by European states.
# SENT:  Instead, the concept of "Western civilization" emerged as a way of grouping together Europe and these colonies.
# SENT:  The question of defining a precise eastern boundary of Europe arises in the Early Modern period, as the eastern extension of Muscovy began to include North Asia.
# SENT:  Throughout the Middle Ages and into the 18th century, the traditional division of the landmass of Eurasia into two continents, Europe and Asia, followed Ptolemy, with the boundary following the Turkish Straits, the Black Sea, the Kerch Strait, the Sea of Azov and the Don (ancient Tanais).
# SENT:  Around 1715, Herman Moll produced a map showing the northern part of the Ob River and the Irtysh River, a major tributary of the Ob, as components of a series of partly-joined waterways taking the boundary between Europe and Asia from the Turkish Straits, and the Don River all the way to the Arctic Ocean.
# SENT:  However, his proposal to adhere to major rivers as the line of demarcation was never taken up by other geographers who were beginning to move away from the idea of water boundaries as the only legitimate divides between Europe and Asia.
# SENT:  Voltaire, writing in 1760 about Peter the Great's efforts to make Russia more European, ignored the whole boundary question with his claim that neither Russia, Scandinavia, northern Germany, nor Poland were fully part of Europe.
# SENT:  In 1958, the Soviet Geographical Society formally recommended that the boundary between the Europe and Asia be drawn in textbooks from Baydaratskaya Bay, on the Kara Sea, along the eastern foot of Ural Mountains, then following the Ural River until the Mugodzhar Hills, and then the Emba River; and Kuma–Manych Depression, thus placing the Caucasus entirely in Asia and the Urals entirely in Europe.
# SENT:  Some view separation of Eurasia into Asia and Europe as a residue of Eurocentrism: "In physical, cultural and historical diversity, China and India are comparable to the entire European landmass, not to a single European country.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:50, WORD1_SENTS:0, WORD2_SENTS:4
# WORDPAIR: Nigeria naira
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nigerian_naira
# SENT:  The naira (sign: ₦; code: NGN; Yoruba: náírá, Tyap: nera) is the currency of Nigeria.
# SENT:  One naira is divided into 100 kobo.The Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) is the sole issuer of legal tender money throughout the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
# SENT:  The naira was introduced on 1 January 1973, replacing the Nigerian pound at a rate of £1 = ₦2 naira.
# SENT:  The coins of the new currency were the first coins issued by an independent Nigeria, as all circulating coins of the Nigerian pound were all struck by the colonial government of the Federation of Nigeria in 1959, with the name of Queen Elizabeth II on the obverse.
# SENT:  This also made Nigeria the last country in the world to abandon the £sd currency system in favour of a decimal currency system.
# SENT:  There was a government plan to redenominate the naira at 100:1 in 2008, but the plan was suspended.
# SENT:  The name "Naira" was coined from the word "Nigeria" by Obafemi Awolowo.
# SENT:  The Central Bank of Nigeria claimed that they attempted to control the annual inflation rate below 10%.
# SENT:  On 31 January 2012, the CBN decided to maintain the key interest rate at 12%, in order to reduce the impact of inflation due to reduction in fuel subsidies.As of 20 June 2016, the naira was allowed to float, after being pegged at ₦197 to US$1 for several months.
# SENT:  Trades speculated the natural range of the naira would be between ₦280 and ₦350 to the dollar.In October 2021, the eNaira, the digital version of the state currency, is officially launched in Nigeria.
# SENT:  Some Nigerians expressed concerns over the usability of the ₦2 coin.
# SENT:  On 1 January 1973, the Central Bank of Nigeria introduced notes for 50 kobo, ₦1, ₦5, ₦10 and ₦20: in April 1984, the colors of all naira banknotes were changed in an attempt to control money laundering.
# SENT:  In mid-2009 when Sanusi Lamido Sanusi took over as CBN Governor, The Central Bank of Nigeria changed the ₦5, ₦10 and ₦50 to polymer notes.
# SENT:  The main feature on the front is the engraved portraits of Alhaji Aliyu Mai-Bornu and Dr. Clement Isong, both of which are former governors of the Central Bank of Nigeria.On the first prints of the ₦100 notes issued starting December 1, 1999, Zuma Rock was captioned as located in Federal Capital Territory, while actually it is situated in Niger State.
# SENT:  Later prints removed the reference to FCT, ABUJA.In 2012 the Central Bank of Nigeria was contemplating the introduction of new currency denominations of ₦5,000.
# SENT:  The bank also made plans to convert ₦5, ₦10, ₦20 and ₦50 into coins which are all presently notes.The Central Bank of Nigeria has announced that it will no longer issue banknotes on polymer citing higher costs and environmental issues.On 12 November 2014, the Central Bank of Nigeria issued a ₦100 commemorative note to celebrate the centennial of Nigeria's existence.
# SENT:  The notes are similar to its regular issue with the portrait of Chief Obafemi Awolowo on the front, but are redesigned to include a new color scheme, revised security features, and the text "One Nigeria, Great Promise" in microprinting.
# SENT:  On the back is a quick response code (QRC) which when scanned leads users to a website about Nigeria's history.In 2019, the naira attained a landmark when for the first time, it featured the signature of a woman.
# SENT:  Priscilla Ekwere Eleje, the Director of Currency operations of the Central Bank of Nigeria at the time, had the honour.
# SENT:  The naira was scheduled for redenomination in August 2008, although this was cancelled by then-President Umaru Musa Yar'Adua, with 100 old naira to become 1 new naira.
# SENT:  The Nigerian Central Bank stated that it would make the naira fully convertible against foreign currencies by 2009.
# SENT:  The naira appreciated against the dollar through 2007 due to high oil revenues.
# SENT:  Due to inflation, Nigerian coins are all essentially worthless now.
# SENT:  5 naira (₦5)
# SENT:  10 naira (₦10)
# SENT:  20 naira (₦20)
# SENT:  50 naira (₦50)
# SENT:  100 naira (₦100)
# SENT:  200 naira (₦200)
# SENT:  500 naira (₦500)
# SENT:  1000 naira (₦1000)50 kobo & 1 naira — no longer in use
# SENT:  5 naira - had lesser value in 2018, and as of November 2022 has a much weakened purchasing power.
# SENT:  In 2022, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) under President Muhammadu Buhari led administration expressed the decision to redesign the naira as a statutory responsibility and a way to curb the increased circulation of counterfeit notes in the country.
# SENT:  He said the higher naira denominations have been the denomination mostly used by the perpetrators of the acts which includes ₦100, ₦200, ₦500 and ₦1,000 notes.
# SENT:  President Muhammadu Buhari officially unveiled the new notes at the state house after 19 years since the naira was redesigned.
# SENT:  The newly redesigned naira notes will be printed by The Nigerian Security Printing and Minting Company Limited which will make the country one out of the four Africa countries who print their currencies locally and not import from foreign countries.CBN, Nigeria's apex bank, informed the citizens that the new notes will be issued from 15 December 2022 onward, and that old naira notes need to be returned to the banking system before 31 January 2023 when they will cease to be legal tender.
# SENT:  In 2022, Nigeria's central bank expressed the scarcity of the currency due to high volume of the naira kept outside the banking system and attributed to be hoarded by politicians.
# SENT:  The official exchange rate set by the Central Bank of Nigeria: naira to U.S. dollar is approximately ₦441.33 per 1 US dollar.
# SENT:  The real exchange rate of the naira to U.S. dollar is approximately ₦752.50 per 1 US dollar on black market.
# SENT:  This table shows the historical value of one U.S. dollar in Nigerian naira.
# SENT:  Interview with Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Four Corners television program on the scandal involving the transfer from paper to polymer currency in Nigeria
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nigerian_naira
# SENT:  The naira (sign: ₦; code: NGN; Yoruba: náírá, Tyap: nera) is the currency of Nigeria.
# SENT:  One naira is divided into 100 kobo.The Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) is the sole issuer of legal tender money throughout the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
# SENT:  The naira was introduced on 1 January 1973, replacing the Nigerian pound at a rate of £1 = ₦2 naira.
# SENT:  The coins of the new currency were the first coins issued by an independent Nigeria, as all circulating coins of the Nigerian pound were all struck by the colonial government of the Federation of Nigeria in 1959, with the name of Queen Elizabeth II on the obverse.
# SENT:  This also made Nigeria the last country in the world to abandon the £sd currency system in favour of a decimal currency system.
# SENT:  There was a government plan to redenominate the naira at 100:1 in 2008, but the plan was suspended.
# SENT:  The name "Naira" was coined from the word "Nigeria" by Obafemi Awolowo.
# SENT:  The Central Bank of Nigeria claimed that they attempted to control the annual inflation rate below 10%.
# SENT:  On 31 January 2012, the CBN decided to maintain the key interest rate at 12%, in order to reduce the impact of inflation due to reduction in fuel subsidies.As of 20 June 2016, the naira was allowed to float, after being pegged at ₦197 to US$1 for several months.
# SENT:  Trades speculated the natural range of the naira would be between ₦280 and ₦350 to the dollar.In October 2021, the eNaira, the digital version of the state currency, is officially launched in Nigeria.
# SENT:  Some Nigerians expressed concerns over the usability of the ₦2 coin.
# SENT:  On 1 January 1973, the Central Bank of Nigeria introduced notes for 50 kobo, ₦1, ₦5, ₦10 and ₦20: in April 1984, the colors of all naira banknotes were changed in an attempt to control money laundering.
# SENT:  In mid-2009 when Sanusi Lamido Sanusi took over as CBN Governor, The Central Bank of Nigeria changed the ₦5, ₦10 and ₦50 to polymer notes.
# SENT:  The main feature on the front is the engraved portraits of Alhaji Aliyu Mai-Bornu and Dr. Clement Isong, both of which are former governors of the Central Bank of Nigeria.On the first prints of the ₦100 notes issued starting December 1, 1999, Zuma Rock was captioned as located in Federal Capital Territory, while actually it is situated in Niger State.
# SENT:  Later prints removed the reference to FCT, ABUJA.In 2012 the Central Bank of Nigeria was contemplating the introduction of new currency denominations of ₦5,000.
# SENT:  The bank also made plans to convert ₦5, ₦10, ₦20 and ₦50 into coins which are all presently notes.The Central Bank of Nigeria has announced that it will no longer issue banknotes on polymer citing higher costs and environmental issues.On 12 November 2014, the Central Bank of Nigeria issued a ₦100 commemorative note to celebrate the centennial of Nigeria's existence.
# SENT:  The notes are similar to its regular issue with the portrait of Chief Obafemi Awolowo on the front, but are redesigned to include a new color scheme, revised security features, and the text "One Nigeria, Great Promise" in microprinting.
# SENT:  On the back is a quick response code (QRC) which when scanned leads users to a website about Nigeria's history.In 2019, the naira attained a landmark when for the first time, it featured the signature of a woman.
# SENT:  Priscilla Ekwere Eleje, the Director of Currency operations of the Central Bank of Nigeria at the time, had the honour.
# SENT:  The naira was scheduled for redenomination in August 2008, although this was cancelled by then-President Umaru Musa Yar'Adua, with 100 old naira to become 1 new naira.
# SENT:  The Nigerian Central Bank stated that it would make the naira fully convertible against foreign currencies by 2009.
# SENT:  The naira appreciated against the dollar through 2007 due to high oil revenues.
# SENT:  Due to inflation, Nigerian coins are all essentially worthless now.
# SENT:  5 naira (₦5)
# SENT:  10 naira (₦10)
# SENT:  20 naira (₦20)
# SENT:  50 naira (₦50)
# SENT:  100 naira (₦100)
# SENT:  200 naira (₦200)
# SENT:  500 naira (₦500)
# SENT:  1000 naira (₦1000)50 kobo & 1 naira — no longer in use
# SENT:  5 naira - had lesser value in 2018, and as of November 2022 has a much weakened purchasing power.
# SENT:  In 2022, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) under President Muhammadu Buhari led administration expressed the decision to redesign the naira as a statutory responsibility and a way to curb the increased circulation of counterfeit notes in the country.
# SENT:  He said the higher naira denominations have been the denomination mostly used by the perpetrators of the acts which includes ₦100, ₦200, ₦500 and ₦1,000 notes.
# SENT:  The newly redesigned naira notes will be printed by The Nigerian Security Printing and Minting Company Limited which will make the country one out of the four Africa countries who print their currencies locally and not import from foreign countries.CBN, Nigeria's apex bank, informed the citizens that the new notes will be issued from 15 December 2022 onward, and that old naira notes need to be returned to the banking system before 31 January 2023 when they will cease to be legal tender.
# SENT:  In 2022, Nigeria's central bank expressed the scarcity of the currency due to high volume of the naira kept outside the banking system and attributed to be hoarded by politicians.
# SENT:  The official exchange rate set by the Central Bank of Nigeria: naira to U.S. dollar is approximately ₦441.33 per 1 US dollar.
# SENT:  This table shows the historical value of one U.S. dollar in Nigerian naira.
# SENT:  Interview with Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Four Corners television program on the scandal involving the transfer from paper to polymer currency in Nigeria
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:24, WORD1_SENTS:26, WORD2_SENTS:30
# WORDPAIR: Kerala Thiruvananthapuram
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thiruvananthapuram
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram (; Malayalam: [t̪iɾuʋɐnɐn̪d̪ɐpuɾɐm] (listen)), also known by its former name Trivandrum (), is the capital of the Indian state of Kerala.
# SENT:  It is the most populous city in Kerala with a population of 957,730 as of 2011.
# SENT:  Located on the west coast of India near the extreme south of the mainland, Thiruvananthapuram is a major information technology hub in Kerala and contributes 55% of the state's software exports as of 2016.
# SENT:  Referred to by Mahatma Gandhi as the "Evergreen city of India", the city is characterised by its undulating terrain of low coastal hills.The present regions that constitute Thiruvananthapuram were ruled by the Ays who were feudatories of the Chera dynasty.
# SENT:  In the 18th century, the king Marthanda Varma expanded the territory, founded the princely state of Travancore, and made Thiruvananthapuram its capital.
# SENT:  Travancore became the most dominant state in Kerala by defeating the powerful Zamorin of Kozhikode in the battle of Purakkad in 1755.
# SENT:  Following India's independence in 1947, Thiruvananthapuram became the capital of Travancore-Cochin state and remained so until the new Indian state of Kerala was formed in 1956.Thiruvananthapuram is a notable academic and research hub and home to the University of Kerala, APJ Abdul Kalam Technological University,  the regional headquarters of Indira Gandhi National Open University, and many other schools and colleges.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram is also home to research centers such as the National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, Indian Space Research Organisation's Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre,  the Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology, National Centre for Earth Science Studies and a campus of the Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram is a major tourist centre, known for the Padmanabhaswamy Temple, the beaches of Kovalam and Varkala, the backwaters of Poovar and Anchuthengu and its Western Ghats tracts of Ponmudi and the Agastya Mala.
# SENT:  In 2012, Thiruvananthapuram was named the best Kerala city to live in, by a field survey conducted by The Times of India.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram was ranked the best Indian city for two consecutive years, 2015 and 2016, according to the Annual Survey of India's City-Systems (ASICS) conducted by the Janaagraha Centre for Citizenship and Democracy.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram is also known in literature, and popular reference as Ananthapuri, derived from the Sanskrit word Syanandurapuram, meaning "The City of Bliss" in Carnatic kirtanas composed by Swathi Thirunal, erstwhile Maharaja of Travancore.
# SENT:  The city was officially referred to as Trivandrum until 1991 (Trivandrum being the anglicised name of the town), when the government decided to reinstate the city's original name Thiruvananthapuram.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram is a relatively modern region with trading traditions dating back to 1000 BCE.
# SENT:  It is believed that the ships of King Solomon landed in a port called Ophir (now Poovar) in Thiruvananthapuram in 1036 BCE.
# SENT:  However, the ancient political and cultural history of the city was almost entirely independent from that of the rest of Kerala.
# SENT:  However the southern region of present-day Kerala state (The coastal belt between Thiruvananthapuram and Alappuzha) was under Ay dynasty, who was more related to the Pandya dynasty of Madurai.The early rulers of the city were the Ays.
# SENT:  Vizhinjam, which is now a region in the present-day Thiruvananthapuram, was the capital of the Ay dynasty.
# SENT:  During the Ay dynasty's rule, Thiruvananthapuram witnessed many battles in which the Chola and Pandyan dynasties attempted to capture the port town.After the death of king Vikramaditya Varaguna in 925 AD, the glory of the Ays departed and almost all their territories became part of the Chera dynasty.
# SENT:  Present-day Thiruvananthapuram city, district, and Kanyakumari district, were parts of the Ay dynasty during ancient and medieval ages, which was a Tamil kingdom based in the southernmost part of the Indian subcontinent.
# SENT:  The Tamil-Dravidian kind of architecture is also found in Padmanabhaswamy temple, which makes it distinct and unique from the architectural style of temples in northern and central parts of Kerala.
# SENT:  Modern-day Southern Kerala (The districts like Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Pathanamthitta, etc.)
# SENT:  The place names, the dialects of Malayalam spoken, and the customs that exist in the southern parts of Kerala still reveal a close relationship with Tamil heritage.
# SENT:  In 1729, Marthanda Varma founded the princely state of Thiruvithamkoor and Thiruvananthapuram was made the capital in 1795 after shifting the capital from Padmanabhapuram in Kanyakumari district.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram became a prominent city in Kerala under Marthanda Varma.
# SENT:  As a result of the annexation of neighbouring chiefdoms, the artists and scholars from these places migrated to Thiruvananthapuram, turning it into a cultural center.
# SENT:  Travancore became the most dominant state in Kerala by defeating the powerful Zamorin of Kozhikode in the battle of Purakkad in 1755.The city developed into a significant intellectual and artistic centre during this period.
# SENT:  The Indian National Congress had a very active presence in Thiruvananthapuram.
# SENT:  The Thiruvananthapuram Municipality came into existence in 1920 as the first municipality in the Travancore region.
# SENT:  This era also saw the establishment of the University of Travancore in 1937, which later became Kerala University.With the end of British rule in 1947, Travancore chose to join the Indian union.
# SENT:  In 1949, Thiruvananthapuram became the capital of Thiru-Kochi, the state formed by the integration of Travancore with its northern neighbour, the Kochi.
# SENT:  When the state of Kerala was formed on 1 November 1956, Thiruvananthapuram became its capital.With the establishment of Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) in 1962, Thiruvananthapuram became the cradle of India's ambitious space programme.
# SENT:  Several establishments of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) were later established in Thiruvananthapuram.A significant milestone in the city's recent history was the establishment of Technopark—India's first IT park—in 1995.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram is built on seven hills by the seashore and is at 8.5°N 76.9°E﻿ / 8.5; 76.9 on the west coast, near the southern tip of mainland India.
# SENT:  The Geological Survey of India has identified Thiruvananthapuram as a moderately earthquake-prone urban centre and categorised the metropolis in the Seismic III Zone.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram lies on the shores of Karamana and Killi rivers.
# SENT:  In western coastal regions of the city, sandy loam soil is found, and on hilly eastern parts of the district, rich dark brown loam of granite origin is found.The Thiruvananthapuram Corporation is spread over 214.86 km2 (82.96 sq mi).
# SENT:  The wider Thiruvananthapuram metropolitan area comprises Thiruvananthapuram corporation, three municipalities and 27 panchayats, as of 2011.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram is the headquarters of the Southern Air Command (SAC) of the Indian Air Force.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram is the first city along the path of the south-west monsoons and gets its first showers in early June.
# SENT:  According to provisional results of the 2011 national census, the Corporation of Thiruvananthapuram, which occupies an area of 214 km2 (83 sq mi), had a population of 957,730.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram's literacy rate of 93.72% exceeds the all-India average of 74%.Malayalees form the vast majority of Thiruvananthapuram's population.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram's smaller communities are the Tamils and North Indians.
# SENT:  The remainder of the community includes Jains, Jews, Sikhs, Buddhists and other religions which account for 0.06% of the population; 0.85% did not state a belief in the census.Malayalam, the official state language, is the dominant language in Thiruvananthapuram City: English is also used, mainly by the white-collar workforce.
# SENT:  As per the 2001 census, the population below the poverty line in the city was 11,667.Thiruvananthapuram has witnessed massive immigration of workers from northern India, mainly Punjab, Haryana, and Madhya Pradesh, and Eastern India, mainly West Bengal and Bihar, and from neighbouring countries like Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Nepal and Bangladesh.
# SENT:  The Corporation of Thiruvananthapuram or TMC oversees and manages the civic infrastructure of the city's 100 wards.
# SENT:  Each ward elects a councillor to the Corporation of Thiruvananthapuram.
# SENT:  The Thiruvananthapuram Development Authority is responsible for the statutory planning and development of the greater Thiruvananthapuram region.As the seat of the Government of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram is home to not only the offices of the local governing agencies but also the Kerala Legislative Assembly and the state secretariat, which is housed in the Kerala Government Secretariat complex.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram has two parliamentary constituencies—Attingal and Thiruvananthapuram—and elects five Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) to the state legislature.
# SENT:  The Thiruvananthapuram City Police is the main law-enforcement agency in the city.
# SENT:  The Thiruvananthapuram city police is a division of the Kerala Police, and the administrative control lies with the Kerala Home Ministry.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram city police are the largest police division in Kerala, and it consists of ten Circle offices and 21 police stations and a sanctioned strength of 3,500 police personnel.
# SENT:  The Central Prison is the oldest prison in Kerala and the headquarters of Kerala prisons and correctional services.
# SENT:  There are two state armed police battalions and a unit of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) based in Thiruvananthapuram.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram also houses a large army cantonment in Pangode which houses some regiments of the Indian Army.In the city there is a Consulate of the United Arab Emirates, a Consulate of the Maldives, and Honorary Consulates of Sri Lanka, Russia and Germany.
# SENT:  The Kerala Water Authority supplies the city with water that is sourced from the Karamana River; most of it is drawn from the Aruvikkara and Peppara reservoirs, and it is treated and purified at the Aruvikkara pumping stations.
# SENT:  Electricity is supplied by the Kerala State Electricity Board.
# SENT:  Fire services are handled by the Kerala Fire And Rescue Services.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram's economy comprises Information Technology, education, plantations, aerospace, commerce and tourism.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram district contributes 10.31%, of the state's GDP.
# SENT:  With an economic growth rate of 13.83%, Thiruvananthapuram is the fastest-growing district in Kerala.
# SENT:  Other enterprises include Travancore Titanium Products, Kerala Automobiles Limited, MILMA, English Indian Clays, Keltron, Trivandrum Rubber Works and HLL Lifecare Limited.
# SENT:  The city contributes around 55% of Kerala's total software exports.
# SENT:  It is the largest employment base campus in Kerala with 52,000 IT/ITES professionals and about 400 companies.
# SENT:  The city is also known for its unique style of architecture involving Kerala Architecture with British and Dravidian influences.
# SENT:  The main museums include Kerala Science and Technology Museum (with its attached Priyadarsini Planetarium), Napier Museum, Kerala Soil Museum and Koyikkal Palace Museum.
# SENT:  Literary development is further aided by state institutions such as the State Central Library, one of the oldest public libraries in India, which was established in 1829, and other major libraries including the Thiruvananthapuram Corporation Central library, and the Kerala University Library.
# SENT:  The 111-day-long Soorya Festival is the biggest art and cultural event in Kerala.
# SENT:  He also established the first film studio in Kerala, the Travancore National Pictures at Thiruvananthapuram in 1926.
# SENT:  The International Film Festival of Kerala (IFFK), which is held every year in December, is one of Asia's largest film festivals in terms of viewer participation.
# SENT:  The city buses operated by Kerala State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) are an important and reliable means of public transport available in the city.
# SENT:  The roads in the city are maintained by the Thiruvananthapuram Roads Development Company Limited (TRDCL) and Kerala PWD.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram Central is the busiest railway station in Kerala.
# SENT:  The airport started operations in 1935 and is the first airport in Kerala.
# SENT:  The government schools are run directly by the Kerala State Education Board and follow the syllabus prescribed by the state government.
# SENT:  In the National Achievement Survey conducted by the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), Thiruvananthapuram is ranked as the best city in Kerala.The notable schools in the city include St. Mary's Higher Secondary School, which is considered one of the largest schools in Asia, with the total number of students exceeding 12,000, Government Model Boys Higher Secondary School, Government Higher Secondary School for Girls, Holy Angel's Convent Trivandrum, SMV School, Trivandrum International School, Chinmaya Vidyalayas, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Loyola School, Christ Nagar School, Thiruvananthapuram, Sarvodaya Vidyalaya, Nirmala Bhavan Higher Secondary School, Arya Central School, Jyothi Nilayam School, St. Joseph's Higher Secondary School, St. Thomas Residential School, The Oxford School and VSSC Central School.
# SENT:  The state universities are the University of Kerala and APJ Abdul Kalam Technological University.
# SENT:  Thiruvananthapuram is one of the regional headquarters of Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU).The Government Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram is the first and a premier medical school in Kerala, founded in 1951.
# SENT:  The Kerala Law Academy is another major legal education institution.
# SENT:  The major Business schools include Asian School of Business, CET School of Management and Institute of Management in Kerala (IMK).
# SENT:  Apart from IIST and IISER, the other major engineering education institutions include College of Engineering, Trivandrum (CET), which is the first engineering college in Kerala, Government Engineering College BartonHill (GEC), Sree Chitra Thirunal College of Engineering (SCT), ER & DCI Institute of Technology, University College of Engineering, Mohandas college of Engineering and Technology and Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology.
# SENT:  Major fine arts colleges are Swathi Thirunal College of Music, which is the first music academy in Kerala and College of Fine Arts Trivandrum.
# SENT:  The Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education is one of the two physical education academic institutes of the Sports Authority of India (SAI).The premier research institutes in Thiruvananthapuram include: Indian Institute of Information Technology and Management, Kerala (IIITMK), National Institute of Speech and Hearing (NISH), Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Centre for Development of Imaging Technology (C-Dit), Centre for Development Studies (CDS), Jawaharlal Nehru Tropical Botanic Garden and Research Institute, National Centre for Earth Science Studies (NCESS), Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) and Oriental Research Institute & Manuscripts Library.Kerala University is ranked as the best university in Kerala according to the MHRD's National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF).
# SENT:  Kerala University also ranked top in overall institution rankings in Kerala.
# SENT:  In engineering, Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) is ranked as the best in Kerala and College of Engineering, Trivandrum (CET) is ranked third in Kerala.
# SENT:  College of Engineering, Trivandrum is also ranked fourth in India and first in Kerala in architecture institution rankings.
# SENT:  The University College is listed as the best college in Kerala.
# SENT:  Most of the media houses in Kerala are based in Thiruvananthapuram.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:20, WORD1_SENTS:30, WORD2_SENTS:38
# WORDPAIR: Serbia Belgrade
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belgrade
# SENT:  Belgrade ( bel-GRAYD,  BEL-grayd; Serbian: Београд / Beograd, lit.
# SENT:  'White City', pronounced [beǒɡrad] (listen); names in other languages) is the capital and largest city of Serbia.
# SENT:  The population of the Belgrade metropolitan area is 1,685,563, according to the 2022 census.
# SENT:  Belgrade is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in Europe and the world.
# SENT:  One of the most important prehistoric cultures of Europe, the Vinča culture, evolved within the Belgrade area in the 6th millennium BC.
# SENT:  It was settled by the Slavs in the 520s, and changed hands several times between the Byzantine Empire, the Frankish Empire, the Bulgarian Empire, and the Kingdom of Hungary before it became the seat of the Serbian king Stefan Dragutin in 1284.
# SENT:  Belgrade served as capital of the Serbian Despotate during the reign of Stefan Lazarević, and then his successor Đurađ Branković returned it to the Hungarian king in 1427.
# SENT:  In 1521, Belgrade was conquered by the Ottomans and became the seat of the Sanjak of Smederevo.
# SENT:  Following the Serbian Revolution, Belgrade was once again named the capital of Serbia in 1841.
# SENT:  Northern Belgrade remained the southernmost Habsburg post until 1918, when it was attached to the city, due to former Austro-Hungarian territories becoming part of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes after World War I. Belgrade was the capital of Yugoslavia from its creation in 1918 to its dissolution in 2006.
# SENT:  In a fatally strategic position, the city has been battled over in 115 wars and razed 44 times, being bombed five times and besieged many times.Being Serbia's primate city, Belgrade has special administrative status within Serbia.
# SENT:  It is the seat of the central government, administrative bodies, and government ministries, as well as home of almost all of the largest Serbian companies, media, and scientific institutions.
# SENT:  Belgrade is classified as a Beta-Global City.
# SENT:  The city is home to the Clinical Centre of Serbia, one of the hospital complexes with the largest capacity in the world, the Church of Saint Sava, one of the largest Orthodox church buildings, and the Štark Arena, one of the largest capacity indoor arenas in Europe.
# SENT:  Belgrade hosted major international events such as the Danube River Conference of 1948, the first Non-Aligned Movement Summit (1961), the first major gathering of the OSCE (1977–1978), the Eurovision Song Contest (2008), as well as sports events such as the first FINA World Aquatics Championships (1973), UEFA Euro (1976), Summer Universiade (2009) and EuroBasket three times (1961, 1975, 2005).
# SENT:  Chipped stone tools found in Zemun show that the area around Belgrade was inhabited by nomadic foragers in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic eras.
# SENT:  There are several Starčevo sites in and around Belgrade, including the eponymous site of Starčevo.
# SENT:  The Starčevo culture was succeeded by the Vinča culture (5500–4500 BC), a more sophisticated farming culture that grew out of the earlier Starčevo settlements and also named for a site in the Belgrade region (Vinča-Belo Brdo).
# SENT:  Evidence of early knowledge about Belgrade's geographical location comes from a variety of ancient myths and legends.
# SENT:  In the time of antiquity, too, the area was populated by Paleo-Balkan tribes, including the Thracians and the Dacians, who ruled much of Belgrade's surroundings.
# SENT:  Specifically, Belgrade was at one point inhabited by the Thraco-Dacian tribe Singi; following Celtic invasion in 279 BC, the Scordisci wrested the city from their hands, naming it Singidūn (d|ūn, fortress).
# SENT:  In 34–33 BC, the Roman army reached Belgrade.
# SENT:  Following Byzantine reconquest, the Byzantine chronicle De Administrando Imperio mentions the White Serbs, who had stopped in Belgrade on their way back home, asking the strategos for lands; they received provinces in the west, towards the Adriatic, which they would rule as subjects to Heraclius (610–641).
# SENT:  Basil II (976–1025) installed a garrison in Belgrade.
# SENT:  The city hosted the armies of the First and the Second Crusade, but, while passing through during the Third Crusade, Frederick Barbarossa and his 190,000 crusaders saw Belgrade in ruins.
# SENT:  King Stefan Dragutin (r. 1276–1282) received Belgrade from his father-in-law, Stephen V of Hungary, in 1284, and it served as the capital of the Kingdom of Syrmia, a vassal state to the Kingdom of Hungary.
# SENT:  Dragutin (Hungarian: Dragutin István) is regarded as the first Serbian king to rule over Belgrade.Following the battles of Maritsa (1371) and Kosovo field (1389), Moravian Serbia, to Belgrade's south, began to fall to the Ottoman Empire.The northern regions of what is now Serbia persisted as the Serbian Despotate, with Belgrade as its capital.
# SENT:  The city flourished under Stefan Lazarević, the son of Serbian prince Lazar Hrebeljanović.
# SENT:  During this time, Belgrade was a haven for many Balkan peoples fleeing Ottoman rule, and is thought to have had a population ranging between 40,000 and 50,000 people.In 1427, Stefan's successor Đurađ Branković, returning Belgrade to the Hungarian king, made Smederevo his new capital.
# SENT:  Even though the Ottomans had captured most of the Serbian Despotate, Belgrade, known as Nándorfehérvár in Hungarian, was unsuccessfully besieged in 1440 and 1456.
# SENT:  Subsequently, most of the city was razed to the ground and its entire Orthodox Christian population was deported to Istanbul to an area that has since become known as the Belgrade forest.
# SENT:  Belgrade was made the seat of the Pashalik of Belgrade (also known as the Sanjak of Smederevo), and quickly became the second largest Ottoman town in Europe at over 100,000 people, surpassed only by Constantinople.
# SENT:  In retribution, Grand Vizier Sinan Pasha ordered the relics of Saint Sava to be publicly torched on the Vračar plateau; in the 20th century, the church of Saint Sava was built to commemorate this event.Occupied by the Habsburgs three times (1688–1690, 1717–1739, 1789–1791), headed by the Holy Roman Princes Maximilian of Bavaria and Eugene of Savoy, and field marshal Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon, respectively, Belgrade was quickly recaptured by the Ottomans and substantially razed each time.
# SENT:  During this period, the city was affected by the two Great Serbian Migrations, in which hundreds of thousands of Serbs, led by two Serbian Patriarchs, retreated together with the Austrian soldiers into the Habsburg Empire, settling in today's Vojvodina and Slavonia.
# SENT:  At the beginning of the 19th century, Belgrade was predominantly inhabited by a Muslim population.
# SENT:  Traces of Ottoman rule and architecture—such as mosques and bazaars, were to remain a prominent part of Belgrade's townscape into the 19th century; several decades, even, after Serbia was granted autonomy from the Ottoman Empire.During the First Serbian Uprising, Serbian revolutionaries held the city from 8 January 1807 until 1813, when it was retaken by the Ottomans.
# SENT:  After the Second Serbian Uprising in 1815, Serbia achieved some sort of sovereignty, which was formally recognised by the Porte in 1830.The development of Belgrade architecture after 1815 can be divided into four periods.
# SENT:  Between 1835 and 1850, the amount of neoclassicist and baroque buildings south of the Austrian border rose considerably, exemplified by St Michael's Cathedral (Serbian: Saborna crkva), completed in 1840.
# SENT:  In 1841, Prince Mihailo Obrenović moved the capital of the Principality of Serbia from Kragujevac to Belgrade.
# SENT:  During his first reign (1815–1839), Prince Miloš Obrenović pursued expansion of the city's population through the addition of new settlements, aiming and succeeding to make Belgrade the centre of the Principality's administrative, military and cultural institutions.
# SENT:  Still, new construction projects were typical for the Christian quarters as the older Muslim quarters declined; from Serbia's autonomy until 1863, the number of Belgrade quarters even decreased, mainly as a consequence of the gradual disappearance of the city's Muslim population.
# SENT:  Following the Čukur Fountain incident, Belgrade was bombed by the Ottomans.On 18 April 1867, the Ottoman government ordered the Ottoman garrison, which had been since 1826 the last representation of Ottoman suzerainty in Serbia, withdrawn from Kalemegdan.
# SENT:  The forlorn Porte's only stipulation was that the Ottoman flag continue to fly over the fortress alongside the Serbian one.
# SENT:  Serbia's de facto independence dates from this event.
# SENT:  In the following years, urban planner Emilijan Josimović had a significant influence on Belgrade.
# SENT:  Of great importance also was the construction of independent Serbian political and cultural institutions, as well as the city's now-plentiful parks.
# SENT:  Pointing to Josimović's work, Serbian scholars have noted an important break with Ottoman traditions.
# SENT:  However, Istanbul—the capital city of the state to which Belgrade and Serbia de jure still belonged—underwent similar changes.
# SENT:  In May 1868, knez Mihailo was assassinated with his cousin Anka Konstantinović while riding in a carriage in his country residence.With the Principality's full independence in 1878 and its transformation into the Kingdom of Serbia in 1882, Belgrade once again became a key city in the Balkans, and developed rapidly.
# SENT:  Nevertheless, conditions in Serbia remained those of an overwhelmingly agrarian country, even with the opening of a railway to Niš, Serbia's second city.
# SENT:  In 1900, the capital had only 70,000 inhabitants (at the time Serbia numbered 2.5 million).
# SENT:  Still, by 1905, the population had grown to more than 80,000 and, by the outbreak of World War I in 1914, it had surpassed the 100,000 citizens, disregarding Zemun, which still belonged to Austria-Hungary.The first-ever projection of motion pictures in the Balkans and Central Europe was held in Belgrade in June 1896 by André Carr, a representative of the Lumière brothers.
# SENT:  He shot the first motion pictures of Belgrade in the next year; however, they have not been preserved.
# SENT:  The first permanent cinema was opened in 1909 in Belgrade.
# SENT:  The First World War began on 28 July 1914 when Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.
# SENT:  Most of the subsequent Balkan offensives occurred near Belgrade.
# SENT:  Austro-Hungarian monitors shelled Belgrade on 29 July 1914, and it was taken by the Austro-Hungarian Army under General Oskar Potiorek on 30 November.
# SENT:  On 15 December, it was re-taken by Serbian troops under Marshal Radomir Putnik.
# SENT:  After a prolonged battle which destroyed much of the city, starting on 6 October 1915, Belgrade fell to German and Austro-Hungarian troops commanded by Field Marshal August von Mackensen on 9 October of the same year.
# SENT:  The city was liberated by Serbian and French troops on 1 November 1918, under the command of Marshal Louis Franchet d'Espèrey of France and Crown Prince Alexander of Serbia.
# SENT:  Belgrade, decimated as a front-line city, lost the title of largest city in the Kingdom to Subotica for some time.
# SENT:  After the war, Belgrade became the capital of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929.
# SENT:  The Kingdom was split into banovinas and Belgrade, together with Zemun and Pančevo, formed a separate administrative unit.During this period, the city experienced fast growth and significant modernisation.
# SENT:  Belgrade's population grew to 239,000 by 1931 (with the inclusion of Zemun), and to 320,000 by 1940.
# SENT:  The population growth rate between 1921 and 1948 averaged 4.08% a year.In 1927, Belgrade's first airport opened, and in 1929, its first radio station began broadcasting.
# SENT:  On 3 September 1939 the first Belgrade Grand Prix, the last Grand Prix motor racing race before the outbreak of World War II, was held around the Belgrade Fortress and was followed by 80,000 spectators.
# SENT:  During the summer and fall of 1941, in reprisal for guerrilla attacks, the Germans carried out several massacres of Belgrade citizens; in particular, members of the Jewish community were subject to mass shootings at the order of General Franz Böhme, the German Military Governor of Serbia.
# SENT:  These protests brought Zoran Đinđić to power, the first mayor of Belgrade since World War II who did not belong to the League of Communists of Yugoslavia or its later offshoot, the Socialist Party of Serbia.In 1999, during the Kosovo War, NATO bombings caused severe damage to the city.
# SENT:  After the Yugoslav Wars, Serbia became home to the highest number of refugees and internally displaced persons in Europe, with more than a third of these refugees having settled in Belgrade.After the 2000 presidential elections, Belgrade was the site of major public protests, with over half a million people taking part.
# SENT:  In 2014, Belgrade Waterfront, an urban renewal project, was initiated by the Government of Serbia and its Emirati partner, Eagle Hills Properties.
# SENT:  Around €3.5 billion was to be jointly invested by the Serbian government and their Emirati partners.
# SENT:  The project is, however, quite controversial—there are a number of uncertainties regarding its funding, necessity, and its architecture's arguable lack of harmony with the rest of the city.In addition to Belgrade Waterfront, the city is under rapid development and reconstruction, especially in the area of Novi Beograd, where (as of 2020) apartment and office buildings were under construction to support the burgeoning Belgrade IT sector, now one of Serbia's largest economic players.
# SENT:  Belgrade is a separate territorial unit in Serbia, with its own autonomous city authority.
# SENT:  It is divided into 14 Secretariats, each having a specific portfolio such as traffic or health care, and several professional services, agencies and institutes.The 2022 Belgrade City Assembly election was won by the Serbian Progressive Party, which formed a ruling coalition with the Socialist Party of Serbia.
# SENT:  Due to the importance of Belgrade in political and economic life of Serbia, the office of city's mayor is often described as the third most important office in the state, after the President of the Government and the President of the Republic.As the capital city, Belgrade is seat of all Serbian state authorities – executive, legislative, judiciary, and the headquarters of almost all national political parties as well as 75 diplomatic missions.
# SENT:  This includes the National Assembly, the Presidency, the Government of Serbia and all the ministries, Supreme Court of Cassation and the Constitutional Court.
# SENT:  The Serbian Orthodox community is by far the largest, with 1,475,168 adherents.
# SENT:  Belgrade is the financial centre of Serbia and Southeast Europe, with a total of 17×10^6 m2 (180×10^6 sq ft) of office space.
# SENT:  As of 2019, Belgrade contained 31.4% of Serbia's employed population and generated over 40.4% of its GDP.
# SENT:  Microsoft's Development Center Serbia, located in Belgrade, was, at the time of its establishment, the fifth such programme on the globe.
# SENT:  Most of Serbia's film industry is based in Belgrade.
# SENT:  Today, it is the centre of the Serbian hip hop scene, with acts such as Beogradski Sindikat, Bad Copy, Škabo, Marčelo, and most of the Bassivity Music stable hailing from or living in the city.
# SENT:  The Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts is also based in Belgrade, as well as the National Library of Serbia.
# SENT:  Following the victory of Serbia's representative Marija Šerifović at the Eurovision Song Contest 2007, Belgrade hosted the Contest in 2008.There is more than 1650 public sculptures on the territory of Belgrade.
# SENT:  The last of the major Belgrade museums is the Museum of Vuk and Dositej, which showcases the lives, work and legacy of Vuk Stefanović Karadžić and Dositej Obradović, the 19th century reformer of the Serbian literary language and the first Serbian Minister of Education, respectively.
# SENT:  Serbian architects took over the development from the foreign builders in the late 19th century, producing the National Theatre, Old Palace, Cathedral Church and later, in the early 20th century, the National Assembly and National Museum, influenced by art nouveau.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:29, WORD1_SENTS:21, WORD2_SENTS:36
# WORDPAIR: Norway Norwegian
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norway
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norwegian
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norwegian_Wikipedia
# SENT:  There are two Norwegian language editions of Wikipedia: one for articles written in Bokmål or Riksmål, and one for articles written in Nynorsk or Høgnorsk.
# SENT:  There are currently 606,014 articles on the Norwegian Wikipedia edition in Bokmål/Riksmål, and 164,025 articles on the Nynorsk edition.
# SENT:  no.wikipedia.com (from August 2002 no.wikipedia.org) — a Wikipedia in Norwegian (specified to be Norwegian Bokmål/Riksmål in 2005) was established on November 26, 2001.
# SENT:  nn.wikipedia.org — a Wikipedia in Norwegian Nynorsk, was established on July 31, 2004.
# SENT:  The first site, the original Norwegian Wikipedia (Norsk Wikipedia), launched on November 26, 2001, and originally did not specify which written standard could/should be used, although de facto almost all the articles were written in Bokmål/Riksmål.
# SENT:  The Norwegian Wikipedia originally had the address no.wikipedia.com, but in August 2002 all Wikipedia editions moved from the wikipedia.com domain to the wikipedia.org domain, shortly after Jimbo Wales had announced that Wikipedia would never have commercial advertisements.
# SENT:  Following a vote in 2005, the main Norwegian site became Bokmål and Riksmål only.By February 2007, the Bokmål/Riksmål edition had over 100,000 articles and the Nynorsk site had over 20,000 articles.
# SENT:  Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish are mutually intelligible languages and can be understood by most speakers of each.
# SENT:  While the ISO 639 two-letter code for Bokmål is nb, the Bokmål/Riksmål Norwegian Wikipedia continues to be hosted at no.wikipedia.org, while the narrower nb code redirects to that site.
# SENT:  Wikimedia Norge is a Norwegian private membership association with the purpose to support Wikimedia's projects, in particular those in Norwegian and Sami languages.
# SENT:  However, it has no formal role in relation to the Norwegian Wikipedia projects.
# SENT:  (in Norwegian) Norwegian Wikipedia (Bokmål and Riksmål)
# SENT:  (in Nynorsk) Norwegian Wikipedia (Nynorsk)
# SENT:  (in Norwegian) Norwegian Wikipedia mobile version (Bokmål and Riksmål)
# SENT:  (in Nynorsk) Norwegian Wikipedia mobile version (Nynorsk)
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norway
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norwegian_language
# SENT:  Norwegian (Norwegian: norsk [ˈnɔʂk] (listen)) is a North Germanic language spoken mainly in Norway, where it is an official language.
# SENT:  Along with Swedish and Danish, Norwegian forms a dialect continuum of more or less mutually intelligible local and regional varieties; some Norwegian and Swedish dialects, in particular, are very close.
# SENT:  Faroese and Icelandic are not mutually intelligible with Norwegian in their spoken form because continental Scandinavian has diverged from them.
# SENT:  While the two Germanic languages with the greatest numbers of speakers, English and German, have close similarities with Norwegian, neither is mutually intelligible with it.
# SENT:  Norwegian is a descendant of Old Norse, the common language of the Germanic peoples living in Scandinavia during the Viking Age.
# SENT:  Today there are two official forms of written Norwegian, Bokmål (literally 'book tongue') and Nynorsk (literally 'new Norwegian'), each with its own variants.
# SENT:  Bokmål developed from the Dano-Norwegian language that replaced Middle Norwegian as the elite language after the union of Denmark–Norway in the 16th and 17th centuries and then evolved in Norway, while Nynorsk was developed based upon a collective of spoken Norwegian dialects.
# SENT:  Norwegian is one of the two official languages in Norway, along with Sámi, a Finno-Ugric language spoken by less than one percent of the population.
# SENT:  Norwegian is one of the working languages of the Nordic Council.
# SENT:  Under the Nordic Language Convention, citizens of the Nordic countries who speak Norwegian have the opportunity to use their native language when interacting with official bodies in other Nordic countries without being liable for any interpretation or translation costs.
# SENT:  Like most of the languages in Europe, the Norwegian language descends from the Proto-Indo-European language.
# SENT:  In the northwest of Europe, the West Germanic languages evolved, which would eventually become English, Dutch, German, and the North Germanic languages, of which Norwegian is one.
# SENT:  The Scandinavian languages at this time are not considered to be separate languages, although there were minor differences among what are customarily called Old Icelandic, Old Norwegian, Old Gutnish, Old Danish, and Old Swedish.
# SENT:  The economic and political dominance of the Hanseatic League between 1250 and 1450 in the main Scandinavian cities brought large Middle Low German–speaking populations to Norway.
# SENT:  In the late Middle Ages, dialects began to develop in Scandinavia because the population was rural and little travel occurred.
# SENT:  Norway entered a union with Denmark in 1397 and Danish, over time, replaced Middle Norwegian as the language of the elite, the church, literature, and the law.
# SENT:  When the union with Denmark ended in 1814, the Dano-Norwegian koiné had become the mother tongue of around 1% of the population.
# SENT:  From the 1840s, some writers experimented with a Norwegianised Danish by incorporating words that were descriptive of Norwegian scenery and folk life, and adopting a more Norwegian syntax.
# SENT:  Knud Knudsen proposed to change spelling and inflection in accordance with the Dano-Norwegian koiné, known as "cultivated everyday speech."
# SENT:  A small adjustment in this direction was implemented in the first official reform of the Danish language in Norway in 1862 and more extensively after his death in two official reforms in 1907 and 1917.
# SENT:  Meanwhile, a nationalistic movement strove for the development of a new written Norwegian.
# SENT:  Ivar Aasen, a botanist and self-taught linguist, began his work to create a new Norwegian language at the age of 22.
# SENT:  He examined the development of Icelandic, which had largely escaped the influences under which Norwegian had come.
# SENT:  The name of the Danish language in Norway was a topic of hot dispute throughout the 19th century.
# SENT:  Its proponents claimed that it was a language common to Norway and Denmark, and no more Danish than Norwegian.
# SENT:  Riksmål was, in 1929, officially renamed Bokmål (literally 'book language'), and Landsmål to Nynorsk (literally 'new Norwegian').
# SENT:  A proposition to substitute Danish-Norwegian (dansk-norsk) for Bokmål lost in parliament by a single vote.
# SENT:  The name Nynorsk, the linguistic term for modern Norwegian, was chosen to contrast with Danish and emphasis on the historical connection to Old Norwegian.
# SENT:  Today, this meaning is often lost, and it is commonly mistaken as a "new" Norwegian in contrast to the "real" Norwegian Bokmål.
# SENT:  A 1946 poll showed that this policy was supported by 79% of Norwegians at the time.
# SENT:  While the sound systems of Norwegian and Swedish are similar, considerable variation exists among the dialects.
# SENT:  The retroflex consonants only appear in East Norwegian dialects as a result of sandhi, combining /ɾ/ with /d/, /l/, /n/, /s/, and /t/.
# SENT:  In Eastern, Central, and Northern Norwegian dialects, it is a tap [ɾ], whereas in Western and Southern Norway, and for some speakers also in Eastern Norway, it is uvular [χ] or [ʁ].
# SENT:  And in the dialects of North-Western Norway, it is realized as [r], much like the trilled ⟨rr⟩ of Spanish.
# SENT:  Norwegian is a pitch-accent language with two distinct pitch patterns, like Swedish.
# SENT:  For example, in many East Norwegian dialects, the word bønder ('farmers') is pronounced using the simpler tone 1, while bønner ('beans' or 'prayers') uses the more complex tone 2.
# SENT:  Though spelling differences occasionally differentiate written words, in most cases the minimal pairs are written alike, since written Norwegian has no explicit accent marks.
# SENT:  Thus, in most of western and northern Norway (the so-called high-pitch dialects) accent 1 is falling, while accent 2 is rising in the first syllable and falling in the second syllable or somewhere around the syllable boundary.
# SENT:  The pitch accents (as well as the peculiar phrase accent in the low-tone dialects) give the Norwegian language a "singing" quality that makes it easy to distinguish from other languages.
# SENT:  The Norwegian alphabet has 29 letters.
# SENT:  Outside Eastern Norway, this spoken variation is not used.
# SENT:  From the 16th to the 19th centuries, Danish was the standard written language of Norway.
# SENT:  As a result, the development of modern written Norwegian has been subject to strong controversy related to nationalism, rural versus urban discourse, and Norway's literary history.
# SENT:  Broadly speaking, Nynorsk writing is widespread in western Norway, though not in major urban areas, and also in the upper parts of mountain valleys in the southern and eastern parts of Norway.
# SENT:  It is little used elsewhere, but 30–40 years ago, it also had strongholds in many rural parts of Trøndelag (mid-Norway) and the southern part of northern Norway (Nordland county).
# SENT:  Bokmål is used in 92% of all written publications, and Nynorsk in 8% (2000).Like some other European countries, Norway has an official "advisory board"— Språkrådet (Norwegian Language Council)— that determines, after approval from the Ministry of Culture, official spelling, grammar, and vocabulary for the Norwegian language.
# SENT:  Riksmål and conservative versions of Bokmål have been the de facto standard written language of Norway for most of the 20th century, being used by large newspapers, encyclopedias, and a significant proportion of the population of the capital Oslo, surrounding areas, and other urban areas, as well as much of the literary tradition.
# SENT:  In 2010, 86.5% of the pupils in the primary and lower secondary schools in Norway receive education in Bokmål, while 13.0% receive education in Nynorsk.
# SENT:  Out of the 431 municipalities in Norway, 161 have declared that they wish to communicate with the central authorities in Bokmål, 116 (representing 12% of the population) in Nynorsk, while 156 are neutral.
# SENT:  In June 2022, the Language Council of Norway (Språkrådet) started including hen in both Bokmål and Nynorsk Norwegian standards.
# SENT:  Altfor Norge ('Too Norway') instead of Alt for Norge ('Everything for Norway', the royal motto of Norway)These misunderstandings occur because most nouns can be interpreted as verbs or other types of words.
# SENT:  Ordboka – Online dictionary search, both Bokmål and Nynorsk.
# SENT:  "Norway, Language and Literature of" .
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Norway
# SENT:  The history of Norway has been influenced to an extraordinary degree by the terrain and the climate of the region.
# SENT:  About 10,000 BC, following the retreat inland of the great ice sheets, the earliest inhabitants migrated north into the territory which is now Norway.
# SENT:  Gradually, between 1500 BC and 500 BC, agricultural settlements spread to the entire south Norway, while the inhabitants of the regions north of Trøndelag continued to hunt and fish.
# SENT:  Norway entered the Kalmar Union with Denmark and Sweden in 1397.
# SENT:  After Sweden left the union in 1523, Norway became the junior partner in Denmark–Norway.
# SENT:  In 1814, after being on the losing side of the Napoleonic Wars with Denmark, Norway was ceded to the king of Sweden by the Treaty of Kiel.
# SENT:  Norway declared its independence and adopted a constitution.
# SENT:  However, no foreign powers recognized the Norwegian independence but supported the Swedish demand for Norway to comply with the treaty of Kiel.
# SENT:  After a short war with Sweden, the countries concluded the Convention of Moss, in which Norway accepted a personal union with Sweden, keeping its Constitution, Storting and separate institutions, except for the foreign service.
# SENT:  The union was formally established after the extraordinary Storting adopted the necessary amendments to the Constitution and elected Charles XIII of Sweden as king of Norway on 4 November 1814.
# SENT:  Germany occupied Norway between 1940 and 1945 during the Second World War, after which Norway joined NATO and underwent a period of reconstruction under public planning.
# SENT:  Oil was discovered in 1969 and by 1995 Norway was the world's second-largest exporter.
# SENT:  From the 1980s Norway started deregulation in many sectors, and in 1989–1990 experienced a banking crisis.
# SENT:  By the 21st century, Norway became one of the world's most prosperous countries with oil and gas production accounting for 20 percent of its economy.
# SENT:  By reinvesting its oil revenues, Norway had the world's largest sovereign wealth fund in 2017.
# SENT:  Norway's coastline rose from glaciation with the end of the last glacial period about 12,000 BCE.
# SENT:  The oldest human skeleton ever discovered in Norway was found in shallow water off Sogne in 1994 and has been carbon dated to 6,600 BCE.
# SENT:  A plague hit southern Norway in the 6th century, with hundreds of farms being depopulated.
# SENT:  In February 2020, Secrets of the Ice Program researchers discovered a 1,500-year-old Viking arrowhead dating back to the Germanic Iron Age and locked in a glacier in southern Norway caused by the climate change in the Jotunheimen Mountains.
# SENT:  Whenever the men were engaged in warfare and voyages, the homestead was run by those remaining at home, supervised by the wife.The lack of suitable farming land in Western Norway caused Norwegians to travel to and colonize sparsely populated areas of Shetland, Orkney, the Faroe Islands and the Hebrides, the latter of which became the Kingdom of the Isles.
# SENT:  Harald Fairhair began the process of unifying Norway when he entered an alliance with the Earls of Lade and was able to unify the country after the decisive Battle of Hafrsfjord (circa 870–900).
# SENT:  By 930 the island had been divided among 400 Norse chieftains.Håkon the Good – the son of Harald Fairhair, raised in England – assumed the crown in 930 and established two large things, assemblies in which the king met with the free men to make decisions: Gulating for Western Norway and Frostating for Trøndelag.
# SENT:  Haakon made an unsuccessful attempt to introduce Christianity in Norway.
# SENT:  Many chieftains feared that Christianization would rob them of power as Goðar in traditional Norse paganism, and had Olaf banished from Norway in 1028.
# SENT:  The church elevated Olaf I to sainthood, and Nidaros (today Trondheim) became the Christian centre of Norway.
# SENT:  Within a few years the Danish rule had become sufficiently unpopular that Norway again united under a Norwegian king, Magnus Olavson the Good, in 1035.From the 1040s to 1130 the country was at peace.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:13, WORD1_SENTS:37, WORD2_SENTS:44
# WORDPAIR: Croatia Croatian
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Croatia
# SENT:  Croatia ( (listen), kroh-AY-shə; Croatian: Hrvatska, pronounced [xř̩ʋaːtskaː]), officially the Republic of Croatia (Croatian: Republika Hrvatska, (listen)), is a country at the crossroads of Central and Southeast Europe.
# SENT:  Croatia was first internationally recognized as independent on 7 June 879 during the reign of Duke Branimir.
# SENT:  Tomislav became the first king by 925, elevating Croatia to the status of a kingdom.
# SENT:  During the succession crisis after the Trpimirović dynasty ended, Croatia entered a personal union with Hungary in 1102.
# SENT:  In 1527, faced with Ottoman conquest, the Croatian Parliament elected Ferdinand I of Austria to the Croatian throne.
# SENT:  Following the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941, most of Croatia was incorporated into a Nazi-installed puppet state, the Independent State of Croatia.
# SENT:  A resistance movement led to the creation of the Socialist Republic of Croatia, which after the war became a founding member and constituent of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
# SENT:  On 25 June 1991, Croatia declared independence, and the War of Independence was successfully fought over the next four years.
# SENT:  Croatia is a republic and a parliamentary liberal democracy.
# SENT:  An active participant in United Nations peacekeeping, Croatia contributed troops to the International Security Assistance Force and filled a nonpermanent seat on the United Nations Security Council for the 2008–2009 term.
# SENT:  Since 2000, the Croatian government has invested in infrastructure, especially transport routes and facilities along the Pan-European corridors.
# SENT:  Croatia is classified by the World Bank as a high-income economy and ranks highly on the Human Development Index.
# SENT:  The European Union is Croatia's most important trading partner.
# SENT:  Croatia provides social security, universal health care, and tuition-free primary and secondary education while supporting culture through public institutions and corporate investments in media and publishing.
# SENT:  Croatia's name derives from Medieval Latin Croātia, itself a derivation of North-West Slavic *Xərwate, by liquid metathesis from Common Slavic period *Xorvat, from proposed Proto-Slavic *Xъrvátъ which possibly comes from the 3rd-century Scytho-Sarmatian form attested in the Tanais Tablets as Χοροάθοςcode: ell promoted to code: el  (Khoroáthoscode: ell promoted to code: el , alternate forms comprise Khoróatoscode: ell promoted to code: el  and Khoroúathoscode: ell promoted to code: el ).
# SENT:  The oldest preserved record of the Croatian ethnonym *xъrvatъ is of the variable stem, attested in the Baška tablet in style zvъnъmirъ kralъ xrъvatъskъ ("Zvonimir, Croatian king"), although it was archaeologically confirmed that the ethnonym Croatorum is mentioned in a church inscription found in Bijaći near Trogir dated to the end of the 8th or early 9th century.
# SENT:  The Latin term Chroatorumcode: lat promoted to code: la  is attributed to a charter of Duke Trpimir I of Croatia, dated to 852 in a 1568 copy of a lost original, but it is not certain if the original was indeed older than the Branimir inscription.
# SENT:  The area known as Croatia today was inhabited throughout the prehistoric period.
# SENT:  Neanderthal fossils dating to the middle Palaeolithic period were unearthed in northern Croatia, best presented at the Krapina site.
# SENT:  The largest proportion of sites is in the valleys of northern Croatia.
# SENT:  In 9 AD, the territory of today's Croatia became part of the Roman Empire.
# SENT:  The most accepted theory, the Slavic theory, proposes migration of White Croats from White Croatia during the Migration Period.
# SENT:  Conversely, the Iranian theory proposes Iranian origin, based on Tanais Tablets containing Ancient Greek inscriptions of given names Χορούαθος, Χοροάθος, and Χορόαθος (Khoroúathos, Khoroáthos, and Khoróathos) and their interpretation as anthroponyms of Croatian people.According to the work De Administrando Imperio written by 10th-century Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII, Croats arrived in the Roman province of Dalmatia in the first half of the 7th century after they defeated the Avars.
# SENT:  Eventually, a dukedom was formed, Duchy of Croatia, ruled by Borna, as attested by chronicles of Einhard starting in 818.
# SENT:  The record represents the first document of Croatian realms, vassal states of Francia at the time.
# SENT:  This population and territory throughout history was tightly related and connected to Croats and Croatia.According to Constantine VII the Christianisation of Croats began in the 7th century, but the claim is disputed, and generally, Christianisation is associated with the 9th century.
# SENT:  The native Croatian royal dynasty was founded by duke Trpimir I in the mid 9th century, who defeated the Byzantine and Bulgarian forces.
# SENT:  The first native Croatian ruler recognised by the Pope was duke Branimir, who received papal recognition from Pope John VIII on 7 June 879.
# SENT:  Tomislav was the first king of Croatia, noted as such in a letter of Pope John X in 925.
# SENT:  The medieval Croatian kingdom reached its peak in the 11th century during the reigns of Petar Krešimir IV (1058–1074) and Dmitar Zvonimir (1075–1089).
# SENT:  When Stjepan II died in 1091, ending the Trpimirović dynasty, Dmitar Zvonimir's brother-in-law Ladislaus I of Hungary claimed the Croatian crown.
# SENT:  For the next four centuries, the Kingdom of Croatia was ruled by the Sabor (parliament) and a Ban (viceroy) appointed by the king.
# SENT:  King Louis II died at Mohács, and in 1527, the Croatian Parliament met in Cetin and chose Ferdinand I of the House of Habsburg as the new ruler of Croatia, under the condition that he protects Croatia against the Ottoman Empire while respecting its political rights.
# SENT:  Following the decisive Ottoman victories, Croatia was split into civilian and military territories in 1538.
# SENT:  The military territories became known as the Croatian Military Frontier and were under direct Habsburg control.
# SENT:  Ottoman advances in Croatia continued until the 1593 Battle of Sisak, the first decisive Ottoman defeat, when borders stabilised.
# SENT:  During the Great Turkish War (1683–1698), Slavonia was regained, but western Bosnia, which had been part of Croatia before the Ottoman conquest, remained outside Croatian control.
# SENT:  The Croatian Parliament supported King Charles III's Pragmatic Sanction and signed their own Pragmatic Sanction in 1712.
# SENT:  Subsequently, the emperor pledged to respect all privileges and political rights of the Kingdom of Croatia, and Queen Maria Theresa made significant contributions to Croatian affairs, such as introducing compulsory education.
# SENT:  This led to the formation of the Kingdom of Dalmatia and the restoration of the Croatian Littoral to the Kingdom of Croatia under one crown.
# SENT:  The 1830s and 1840s featured romantic nationalism that inspired the Croatian National Revival, a political and cultural campaign advocating the unity of South Slavs within the empire.
# SENT:  Its primary focus was establishing a standard language as a counterweight to Hungarian while promoting Croatian literature and culture.
# SENT:  During the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, Croatia sided with Austria.
# SENT:  The treaty left Croatia's status to Hungary, which was resolved by the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement of 1868 when the kingdoms of Croatia and Slavonia were united.
# SENT:  The Croatian and Slavonian sectors of the Frontier returned to Croatia in 1881, under provisions of the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement.
# SENT:  Renewed efforts to reform Austria-Hungary, entailing federalisation with Croatia as a federal unit, were stopped by World War I.
# SENT:  On 29 October 1918 the Croatian Parliament (Sabor) declared independence and decided to join the newly formed State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs, which in turn entered into union with the Kingdom of Serbia on 4 December 1918 to form the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.
# SENT:  The Croatian Parliament never ratified the union with Serbia and Montenegro.
# SENT:  The 1921 constitution defining the country as a unitary state and abolition of Croatian Parliament and historical administrative divisions effectively ended Croatian autonomy.
# SENT:  The new constitution was opposed by the most widely supported national political party—the Croatian Peasant Party (HSS) led by Stjepan Radić.The political situation deteriorated further as Radić was assassinated in the National Assembly in 1928, leading to King Alexander I to establish a dictatorship in January 1929.
# SENT:  The Yugoslav government retained control of defence, internal security, foreign affairs, trade, and transport while other matters were left to the Croatian Sabor and a crown-appointed Ban.
# SENT:  Parts of Dalmatia were annexed by Italy, Hungary annexed the northern Croatian regions of Baranja and Međimurje.
# SENT:  In the following years, ethnic Germans faced persecution in Yugoslavia, and many were interned.The political aspirations of the Partisan movement were reflected in the State Anti-fascist Council for the National Liberation of Croatia, which developed in 1943 as the bearer of Croatian statehood and later transformed into the Parliament in 1945, and AVNOJ—its counterpart at the Yugoslav level.
# SENT:  In 1967, Croatian authors and linguists published a Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Standard Language demanding equal treatment for their language.
# SENT:  The declaration contributed to a national movement seeking greater civil rights and redistribution of the Yugoslav economy, culminating in the Croatian Spring of 1971, which was suppressed by Yugoslav leadership.
# SENT:  Still, the 1974 Yugoslav Constitution gave increased autonomy to federal units, basically fulfilling a goal of the Croatian Spring and providing a legal basis for independence of the federative constituents.Following Tito's death in 1980, the political situation in Yugoslavia deteriorated.
# SENT:  In January 1990, the Communist Party fragmented along national lines, with the Croatian faction demanding a looser federation.
# SENT:  As tensions rose, Croatia declared independence on 25 June 1991.
# SENT:  Serbs living in Croatian towns, especially those near the front lines, were subjected to various forms of discrimination.
# SENT:  Croatian Serbs in Eastern and Western Slavonia and parts of the Krajina were forced to flee or were expelled by Croatian forces, though on a restricted scale and in lesser numbers..
# SENT:  The Croatian Government publicly deplored these practices and sought to stop them, indicating that they were not a part of the Government's policy.
# SENT:  The war effectively ended in August 1995 with a decisive victory by Croatia; the event is commemorated each year on 5 August as Victory and Homeland Thanksgiving Day and the Day of Croatian Defenders.
# SENT:  Following the Croatian victory, about 200,000 Serbs from the self-proclaimed Republic of Serbian Krajina fled the region and hundreds of mainly elderly Serb civilians were killed in the aftermath of the military operation.
# SENT:  Although the Croatian economy had enjoyed a significant boom in the early 2000s, the financial crisis in 2008 forced the government to cut spending, thus provoking a public outcry.Croatia served on the United Nations Security Council for the 2008–2009 term, assuming the presidency in December 2008.
# SENT:  A majority of Croatian voters opted in favour of EU membership in a 2012 referendum., Croatia joined the European Union effective 1 July 2013.
# SENT:  Croatia was affected by the 2015 European migrant crisis when Hungary's closure of borders with Serbia pushed over 700,000 refugees and migrants to pass through Croatia on their way to other countries.On 19 October 2016, Andrej Plenković began serving as Croatian Prime Minister.
# SENT:  Forests are significantly present, as they cover 2,490,000 hectares (6,200,000 acres) representing 44% of Croatian land area.
# SENT:  Government powers in Croatia are legislative, executive, and judiciary powers.The President of the Republic (Croatian: Predsjednik Republike) is the head of state, directly elected to a five-year term and is limited by the Constitution to two terms.
# SENT:  The two largest political parties in Croatia are the Croatian Democratic Union and the Social Democratic Party of Croatia.Croatia has a civil law legal system in which law arises primarily from written statutes, with judges serving as implementers and not creators of law.
# SENT:  Croatian law is divided into two principal areas—private and public law.
# SENT:  Before EU accession negotiations were completed, Croatian legislation had been fully harmonised with the Community acquis.The main national courts are the Constitutional Court, which oversees violations of the Constitution, and the Supreme Court, which is the highest court of appeal.
# SENT:  56 foreign embassies and 67 consulates operate in the country in addition to offices of international organisations such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), International Organization for Migration (IOM), Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), World Bank, World Health Organization (WHO), International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and UNICEF.As of 2019, the Croatian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration employed 1,381 personnel and expended 765.295 million kunas (€101.17 million).
# SENT:  Stated aims of Croatian foreign policy include enhancing relations with neighbouring countries, developing international co-operation and promotion of the Croatian economy and Croatia itself.Croatia is a member of the European Union.
# SENT:  The Croatian Armed Forces (CAF) consist of the Air Force, Army, and Navy branches in addition to the Education and Training Command and Support Command.
# SENT:  Conscientious objectors could instead opt for eight months of civilian service.As of May 2019, the Croatian military had 72 members stationed in foreign countries as part of United Nations-led international peacekeeping forces.
# SENT:  Croatian-made weapons and vehicles used by CAF include the standard sidearm HS2000 manufactured by HS Produkt and the M-84D battle tank designed by the Đuro Đaković factory.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:50, WORD1_SENTS:26, WORD2_SENTS:0
# WORDPAIR: Quito Ecuador
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecuador
# SENT:  Ecuador ( (listen) EK-wə-dor; Spanish pronunciation: [ekwaˈðoɾ] (listen); Quechua: Ikwayur; Shuar: Ecuador or Ekuatur), officially the Republic of Ecuador (Spanish: República del Ecuador,  which literally translates as "Republic of the Equator"; Quechua: Ikwadur Ripuwlika; Shuar: Ekuatur Nunka), is a country in northwestern South America, bordered by Colombia on the north, Peru on the east and south, and the Pacific Ocean on the west.
# SENT:  Ecuador also includes the Galápagos Islands in the Pacific, about 1,000 kilometers (621 mi) west of the mainland.
# SENT:  The country's capital and largest city is Quito.
# SENT:  The territories of modern-day Ecuador were once home to a variety of Indigenous groups that were gradually incorporated into the Inca Empire during the 15th century.
# SENT:  The legacy of both empires is reflected in Ecuador's ethnically diverse population, with most of its 17.8 million people being mestizos, followed by large minorities of Europeans, Native American, African, and Asian descendants.
# SENT:  The sovereign state of Ecuador is a representative democratic republic and a developing country that is highly dependent on commodities, namely petroleum and agricultural products.
# SENT:  One of 17 megadiverse countries in the world, Ecuador hosts many endemic plants and animals, such as those of the Galápagos Islands.
# SENT:  The country's name means "Equator" in Spanish, truncated from the Spanish official name, República del Ecuador (lit.
# SENT:  "Republic of the Equator"), derived from the former Ecuador Department of Gran Colombia established in 1824 as a division of the former territory of the Royal Audience of Quito.
# SENT:  Quito, which remained the capital of the department and republic, is located only about 40 kilometers (25 mi), 1⁄4 of a degree, south of the equator.
# SENT:  Various peoples had settled in the area of future Ecuador before the arrival of the Incas.
# SENT:  The first people who reached Ecuador may have journeyed by land from North and Central America or by boat down the Pacific Ocean coastline.
# SENT:  Many civilizations arose in Ecuador, such as the Valdivia Culture and Machalilla Culture on the coast, the Quitus (near present-day Quito), and the Cañari (near present-day Cuenca).
# SENT:  Similarly, a number of loyal Inca subjects from Peru and Bolivia were brought to Ecuador to prevent rebellion.
# SENT:  Thus, the region of highland Ecuador became part of the Inca Empire in 1463 sharing the same language.
# SENT:  In contrast, when the Incas made incursions into coastal Ecuador and the eastern Amazon jungles of Ecuador, they found both the environment and indigenous people more hostile.
# SENT:  As a result, Inca expansion into the Amazon Basin and the Pacific coast of Ecuador was hampered.
# SENT:  The indigenous people of the Amazon jungle and coastal Ecuador remained relatively autonomous until the Spanish soldiers and missionaries arrived in force.
# SENT:  The Amazonian people and the Cayapas of Coastal Ecuador were the only groups to resist Inca and Spanish domination, maintaining their language and culture well into the 21st century.
# SENT:  The untimely death of both the heir Ninan Cuchi and the Emperor Huayna Capac, from a European disease that spread into Ecuador, created a power vacuum between two factions.
# SENT:  He gave the territories pertaining to present-day Ecuador and northern Peru to his favorite son Atahualpa, who was to rule from Quito; and he gave the rest to Huáscar, who was to rule from Cuzco.
# SENT:  He willed that his heart be buried in Quito, his favorite city, and the rest of his body be buried with his ancestors in Cuzco.
# SENT:  In 1563, Quito became the seat of a real audiencia (administrative district) of Spain and part of the Viceroyalty of Peru and later the Viceroyalty of New Granada.
# SENT:  The 1797 Riobamba earthquake, which caused up to 40,000 casualties, was studied by Alexander von Humboldt, when he visited the area in 1801–1802.After nearly 300 years of Spanish rule, Quito still remained small with a population of 10,000 people.
# SENT:  Quito's nickname, "Luz de América" ("Light of America"), is based on its leading role in trying to secure an independent, local government.
# SENT:  On 9 October 1820, the Department of Guayaquil became the first territory in Ecuador to gain its independence from Spain, and it spawned most of the Ecuadorian coastal provinces, establishing itself as an independent state.
# SENT:  Its inhabitants celebrated what is now Ecuador's official Independence Day on 24 May 1822.
# SENT:  The rest of Ecuador gained its independence after Antonio José de Sucre defeated the Spanish Royalist forces at the Battle of Pichincha, near Quito.
# SENT:  Following the battle, Ecuador joined Simón Bolívar's Republic of Gran Colombia, also including modern-day Colombia, Venezuela and Panama.
# SENT:  In 1830, Ecuador separated from Gran Colombia and became an independent republic.
# SENT:  Two years later, it annexed the Galapagos Islands.The 19th century was marked by instability for Ecuador with a rapid succession of rulers.
# SENT:  The first president of Ecuador was the Venezuelan-born Juan José Flores, who was ultimately deposed, followed by several authoritarian leaders, such as Vicente Rocafuerte; José Joaquín de Olmedo; José María Urbina; Diego Noboa; Pedro José de Arteta; Manuel de Ascásubi; and Flores's own son, Antonio Flores Jijón, among others.
# SENT:  Ecuador abolished slavery and freed its black slaves in 1851.
# SENT:  Since Ecuador's separation from Colombia on 13 May 1830, its first President, General Juan José Flores, laid claim to the territory that was called the Real Audiencia of Quito, also referred to as the Presidencia of Quito.
# SENT:  In the case of Ecuador, Flores-based Ecuador's de jure claims on the following cedulas – Real Cedula of 1563, 1739, and 1740; with modifications in the Amazon Basin and Andes Mountains that were introduced through the Treaty of Guayaquil (1829) which Peru reluctantly signed, after the overwhelmingly outnumbered Gran Colombian force led by Antonio José de Sucre defeated President and General La Mar's Peruvian invasion force in the Battle of Tarqui.
# SENT:  In addition, Ecuador's eastern border with the Portuguese colony of Brazil in the Amazon Basin was modified before the wars of Independence by the First Treaty of San Ildefonso (1777) between the Spanish Empire and the Portuguese Empire.
# SENT:  Moreover, to add legitimacy to his claims, on 16 February 1840, Flores signed a treaty with Spain, whereby Flores convinced Spain to officially recognize Ecuadorian independence and its sole rights to colonial titles over Spain's former colonial territory known anciently to Spain as the Kingdom and Presidency of Quito.
# SENT:  Ecuador during its long and turbulent history has lost most of its contested territories to each of its more powerful neighbors, such as Colombia in 1832 and 1916, Brazil in 1904 through a series of peaceful treaties, and Peru after a short war in which the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro was signed in 1942.
# SENT:  During the struggle for independence, before Peru or Ecuador became independent nations, a few areas of the former Vice Royalty of New Granada – Guayaquil, Tumbez, and Jaén – declared themselves independent from Spain.
# SENT:  A few months later, a part of the Peruvian liberation army of San Martin decided to occupy the independent cities of Tumbez and Jaén with the intention of using these towns as springboards to occupy the independent city of Guayaquil and then to liberate the rest of the Audiencia de Quito (Ecuador).
# SENT:  It was common knowledge among the top officers of the liberation army from the south that their leader San Martin wished to liberate present-day Ecuador and add it to the future republic of Peru, since it had been part of the Inca Empire before the Spaniards conquered it.
# SENT:  However, Bolívar's intention was to form a new republic known as the Gran Colombia, out of the liberated Spanish territory of New Granada which consisted of Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador.
# SENT:  San Martin's plans were thwarted when Bolívar, with the help of Marshal Antonio José de Sucre and the Gran Colombian liberation force, descended from the Andes mountains and occupied Guayaquil; they also annexed the newly liberated Audiencia de Quito to the Republic of Gran Colombia.
# SENT:  This happened a few days before San Martin's Peruvian forces could arrive and occupy Guayaquil, with the intention of annexing Guayaquil to the rest of Audiencia of Quito (Ecuador) and to the future republic of Peru.
# SENT:  In the south, Ecuador had de jure claims to a small piece of land beside the Pacific Ocean known as Tumbes which lay between the Zarumilla and Tumbes rivers.
# SENT:  In Ecuador's southern Andes Mountain region where the Marañon cuts across, Ecuador had de jure claims to an area it called Jaén de Bracamoros.
# SENT:  Some Peruvian generals, without any legal titles backing them up and with Ecuador still federated with the Gran Colombia, had the desire to annex Ecuador to the Republic of Peru at the expense of the Gran Colombia, feeling that Ecuador was once part of the Inca Empire.
# SENT:  After Peru was completely liberated from Spain by the patriot armies led by Bolivar and Antonio Jose de Sucre at the Battle of Ayacucho dated 9 December 1824, there was a strong desire by some Peruvians to resurrect the Inca Empire and to include Bolivia and Ecuador.
# SENT:  One of these Peruvian Generals was the Ecuadorian-born José de La Mar, who became one of Peru's presidents after Bolivar resigned as dictator of Peru and returned to Colombia.
# SENT:  President and General José de La Mar, who was born in Ecuador, believing his opportunity had come to annex the District of Ecuador to Peru, personally, with a Peruvian force, invaded and occupied Guayaquil and a few cities in the Loja region of southern Ecuador on 28 November 1828.
# SENT:  According to the peace negotiations Peru agreed to return Guayaquil, Tumbez, and Jaén; despite this, Peru returned Guayaquil, but failed to return Tumbes and Jaén, alleging that it was not obligated to follow the agreements, since the Gran Colombia ceased to exist when it divided itself into three different nations – Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela.
# SENT:  The Central District of the Gran Colombia, known as Cundinamarca or New Granada (modern Colombia) with its capital in Bogota, did not recognize the separation of the Southern District of the Gran Colombia, with its capital in Quito, from the Gran Colombian federation on 13 May 1830.
# SENT:  After Ecuador's separation, the Department of Cauca voluntarily decided to unite itself with Ecuador due to instability in the central government of Bogota.
# SENT:  The Venezuelan born President of Ecuador, the general Juan José Flores, with the approval of the Ecuadorian congress annexed the Department of Cauca on 20 December 1830, since the government of Cauca had called for union with the District of the South as far back as April 1830.
# SENT:  Moreover, the Cauca region, throughout its long history, had very strong economic and cultural ties with the people of Ecuador.
# SENT:  Also, the Cauca region, which included such cities as Pasto, Popayán, and Buenaventura, had always been dependent on the Presidencia or Audiencia of Quito.
# SENT:  Fruitless negotiations continued between the governments of Bogotá and Quito, where the government of Bogotá did not recognize the separation of Ecuador or that of Cauca from the Gran Colombia until war broke out in May 1832.
# SENT:  In five months, New Granada defeated Ecuador due to the fact that the majority of the Ecuadorian Armed Forces were composed of rebellious angry unpaid veterans from Venezuela and Colombia that did not want to fight against their fellow countrymen.
# SENT:  The Treaty of Pasto of 1832 was signed by which the Department of Cauca was turned over to New Granada (modern Colombia), the government of Bogotá recognized Ecuador as an independent country and the border was to follow the Ley de División Territorial de la República de Colombia (Law of the Division of Territory of the Gran Colombia) passed on 25 June 1824.
# SENT:  In 1978, the city of Quito and the Galápagos Islands were inscribed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites, making the first two properties in the world to become listed sites.
# SENT:  Popular sentiment in Ecuador became strongly nationalistic against Peru: graffiti could be seen on the walls of Quito referring to Peru as the "Cain de Latinoamérica", a reference to the murder of Abel by his brother Cain in the Book of Genesis.Ecuador and Peru signed the Brasilia Presidential Act peace agreement on 26 October 1998, which ended hostilities, and effectively put an end to the Western Hemisphere's longest running territorial dispute.
# SENT:  On 10 October, protesters overran the capital Quito causing the Government of Ecuador to relocate to Guayaquil, but the government had plans to return to Quito.
# SENT:  The current president of Ecuador, Guillermo Lasso, exercises his power from the presidential Palacio de Carondelet in Quito.
# SENT:  The legislative branch is embodied by the National Assembly, which is headquartered in the city of Quito in the Legislative Palace, and consists of 137 assemblymen, divided into ten committees and elected for a four-year term.
# SENT:  Its main body is the National Electoral Council, which is based in the city of Quito, and consists of seven members of the political parties most voted, enjoying complete financial and administrative autonomy.
# SENT:  Ecuador also asked UNASUR to return the headquarters building of the organization, based in its capital city, Quito.
# SENT:  Regionalization, or zoning, is the union of two or more adjoining provinces in order to decentralize the administrative functions of the capital, Quito.
# SENT:  Administrative city: LojaQuito and Guayaquil are Metropolitan Districts.
# SENT:  In 2009, the new administration at the Defense Ministry launched a deep restructuring within the forces, increasing spending budget to $1,691,776,803, an increase of 25%.The Military Academy General Eloy Alfaro (c. 1838) located in Quito is in charge of graduating army officers.
# SENT:  The largest Sierran city is Quito.
# SENT:  La Región Insular is the region comprising the Galápagos Islands, some 1,000 kilometers (620 mi) west of the mainland in the Pacific Ocean.Ecuador's capital and largest city is Quito, which is in the province of Pichincha in the Sierra region.
# SENT:  Cotopaxi, just south of Quito, is one of the world's highest active volcanoes.
# SENT:  The industry is concentrated mainly in Guayaquil, the largest industrial center, and in Quito, where in recent years the industry has grown considerably.
# SENT:  The most notable icons in Ecuadorian sciences are the mathematician and cartographer Pedro Vicente Maldonado, born in Riobamba in 1707, and the printer, independence precursor, and medical pioneer Eugenio Espejo, born in 1747 in Quito.
# SENT:  However, according to Nature, the multidisciplinary scientific journal, the top 10 institutions that carry the most outstanding scientific contributions are: Yachay Tech University (Yachay Tech), Escuela Politécnica Nacional (EPN), and Universidad San Francisco de Quito (USFQ).
# SENT:  The country has two cities with UNESCO World Heritage Sites: Quito and Cuenca, as well as two natural UNESCO World Heritage Sites: the Galapagos Islands and Sangay National Park in addition to one World Biosphere Reserve, such as the Cajas Massif.
# SENT:  Cultural attractions: Historic center of Quito, Ciudad Mitad del Mundo, Ingapirca, Historic center of Cuenca, Latacunga and its Mama Negra festival.
# SENT:  The Mariscal Sucre International Airport in Quito and the José Joaquín de Olmedo International Airport in Guayaquil have experienced a high increase in demand and have required modernization.
# SENT:  In the case of Guayaquil it involved a new air terminal, once considered the best in South America and the best in Latin America and in Quito where an entire new airport has been built in Tababela and was inaugurated in February 2013, with Canadian assistance.
# SENT:  However, the main road leading from Quito city center to the new airport will only be finished in late 2014, making current travelling from the airport to downtown Quito as long as two hours during rush hour.
# SENT:  Quito's old city-center airport is being turned into parkland, with some light industrial use.
# SENT:  In addition, there is a small European Jewish (Ecuadorian Jews) population, which is based mainly in Quito and to a lesser extent in Guayaquil.Ecuador also has a small population of Asian origins, mainly those from West Asia, like the economically well off descendants of Lebanese and Palestinian immigrants, who are either Christian or Muslim (see Islam in Ecuador), and an East Asian community mainly consisting of those of Japanese and Chinese descent, whose ancestors arrived as miners, farmhands and fishermen in the late 19th century.Amerindians account for 7% of the current population.
# SENT:  Today the Jewish Community of Ecuador (Comunidad Judía del Ecuador) has its seat in Quito and has approximately 200 members.
# SENT:  The five largest cities in the country are Quito (2.78 million inhabitants), Guayaquil (2.72 million inhabitants), Cuenca (636,996 inhabitants), Santo Domingo (458,580 inhabitants), and Ambato (387,309 inhabitants).
# SENT:  The most populated metropolitan areas of the country are those of Guayaquil, Quito, Cuenca, Manabí Centro (Portoviejo-Manta) and Ambato.
# SENT:  They reside mostly in Quito and Guayaquil.
# SENT:  The existence of his literary work came to light many centuries later, when a crew of masons was restoring the walls of a colonial church in Quito and found a hidden manuscript.
# SENT:  De Velasco wrote about the nations and chiefdoms that had existed in the Kingdom of Quito (today Ecuador) before the arrival of the Spanish.
# SENT:  The best known art styles from Ecuador belonged to the Escuela Quiteña (Quito School), which developed from the 16th to 18th centuries, examples of which are on display in various old churches in Quito.
# SENT:  Its best known professional teams include; Emelec from Guayaquil, Liga De Quito from Quito; Barcelona S.C. from Guayaquil, the most popular team in Ecuador, also the team with most local championships; Deportivo Quito, and El Nacional from Quito; Olmedo from Riobamba; and Deportivo Cuenca from Cuenca.
# SENT:  Currently the most successful football team in Ecuador is LDU Quito, and it is the only Ecuadorian team that has won the Copa Libertadores, the Copa Sudamericana, and the Recopa Sudamericana; they were also runners-up in the 2008 FIFA Club World Cup.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:21, WORD1_SENTS:29, WORD2_SENTS:41
# WORDPAIR: Syria Arabic
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syria
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syrian_Arabic
# SENT:  Syrian Arabic refers to any of the Arabic varieties spoken in Syria, or specifically to Levantine Arabic.
# SENT:  Characterized by *q > k, *g > c [ts], *k > č, and ʾimāla of type *lisān > lsīn.
# SENT:  Shawi Arabic and Najdi Arabic are also spoken in Syria.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_of_Syria
# SENT:  Arabic is the official language of Syria and is the most widely spoken language in the country.
# SENT:  Several modern Arabic dialects are used in everyday life, most notably Levantine in the west and Mesopotamian in the northeast.
# SENT:  According to The Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, in addition to Arabic, the following languages are spoken in the country, in order of the number of speakers: Kurdish, Turkish, Neo-Aramaic (four dialects), Circassian, Chechen, Armenian, and finally Greek.
# SENT:  None of these languages has official status.Historically, Aramaic was the lingua franca of the region before the advent of Arabic and is still spoken among Assyrians, and Classical Syriac is still used as the liturgical language of various Syriac Christian denominations.
# SENT:  Syrian Sign Language is the principal language of the deaf community.
# SENT:  Modern Standard Arabic is the language of education and writing.
# SENT:  At home, most Syrians speak various dialects of Levantine Arabic with Damascus Arabic being the prestigious dialect in the media.
# SENT:  Lebanese Arabic together with Syrian are classified as North Levantine Arabic (ISO 639-3 language code apc).
# SENT:  Lebanese is similar especially to the southern Syrian dialects, though it has more influence from Palestinian Arabic.
# SENT:  Due to Syria's long history of multiculturalism and foreign imperialism, Syrian Arabic exhibits a vocabulary stratum that includes word borrowings from Turkish, Kurdish, Armenian, Syriac, English, French and Persian.
# SENT:  There is no standardized spelling, but usually it is written in Arabic alphabet from right to left.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syrians
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arab_Kingdom_of_Syria
# SENT:  The Arab Kingdom of Syria (Arabic: المملكة العربية السورية, al-Mamlakah al-‘Arabīyah as-Sūrīyah) was a self-proclaimed, unrecognized state that began as a "fully and absolutely independent... Arab constitutional government" announced on 5 October 1918 with the permission of the British military, gained de facto independence as an "Emirate" after the withdrawal of the British forces from OETA East on 26 November 1919, and was proclaimed as a Kingdom on 8 March 1920.
# SENT:  Despite its claims to the territory of Greater Syria, Faisal's government controlled a limited area and was dependent on Britain which, along with France, generally opposed the idea of a Greater Syria and refused to recognize the kingdom.
# SENT:  The Arab Revolt and the McMahon–Hussein Correspondence were crucial factors in the foundation of the Arab Kingdom of Syria.
# SENT:  Ultimately, the implementation of the Sykes–Picot Agreement would lead to the undermining and end of the Arab Kingdom of Syria.
# SENT:  Faisal had come to expect an independent Arab kingdom in the name of his father but was soon told of the division of territory and how Syria fell under French protective power.
# SENT:  There was some likelihood that by then the British would have changed their support for French pretensions in Syria.
# SENT:  The meeting determined that in return for a British guarantee of French control in Syria, the British would be given a mandate over Mosul and Palestine.
# SENT:  These events in Europe led Syrian nationalist societies like al-Fatat (the Young Arab Society) to make preparations for a national congress.
# SENT:  These Syrian nationalist societies advocated complete independence for an Arab Kingdom that united Arabs under Faisal.
# SENT:  The first official session of the Syrian Congress was held on 3 June 1919 and al-Fatat member Hashim al-Atassi was elected its president.
# SENT:  On 2 July the Syrian National Congress in Damascus passed the Damascus Program, a series of resolutions calling for a completely independent constitutional monarchy with Faisal as king, asking for assistance from the United States, and rejecting any rights claimed by the French.
# SENT:  on the north, the Taurus Range; on the south, a line running from Rafah to Al-Jauf and following the Syria-Hejaz border below 'Aqaba; on the east, the boundary formed by the Euphrates and Khabur rivers and a line stretching from some distance east of Abu-Kamal to some distance east of al-Jauf; on the west, the Mediterranean Sea.
# SENT:  Any hope that Faisal may have had that either the British or Americans would come to his aid and counter French moves quickly faded, especially after the Anglo-French Agreement for the withdrawal of British troops from Syria and the end of the British military government in Syria.
# SENT:  The British withdrew from the region on 26 November 1919.In January 1920, Faisal was forced into an agreement with France which stipulated that France would uphold the existence of the Syrian state and would not station troops in Syria as long as the French government remained the only government supplying advisers, counselors and technical experts.
# SENT:  In the aftermath of this reversal, violent attacks against French forces took place and the Syrian Congress assembled in March 1920 to declare Faisal the king of Syria as well as to officially set up the Arab Kingdom of Syria with Hashim al-Atassi as Prime Minister and Yusuf al-'Azma as Minister of War and Chief of Staff.
# SENT:  However, Yusuf al-'Azma, the defense minister, ignored the King's order, and led a small army to confront the French advance into Syria.
# SENT:  At the Battle of Maysalun, the Syrian army was easily defeated by the French, with General al-'Azma being killed during the battle.
# SENT:  The loss led to the siege and capture of Damascus on 25 July 1920 and the French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon was put into effect thereafter.
# SENT:  After surrendering to French forces, Faisal was expelled from Syria and went to live in the United Kingdom in August 1920.
# SENT:  A pro-French government under the leadership of 'Alaa al-Din al-Darubi was installed one day after the fall of Damascus, on 25 July 1920.: 37  On 1 September 1920, General Gouraud divided the French mandate territory of Syria into several smaller states as part of a French scheme to make Syria easier to control.
# SENT:  The symbolism of the fall of the Kingdom of Syria also imparted deep mistrust of European powers, who were seen as liars and oppressors.
# SENT:  
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syria_(region)
# SENT:  Syria (Hieroglyphic Luwian: 𔒂𔒠 Sura/i; Greek: Συρία) or Sham (Arabic: أَلشَّام, romanized: ash-Shām) is the name of a historical region located east of the Mediterranean Sea in Western Asia, broadly synonymous with the Levant.
# SENT:  Other synonyms are Greater Syria or Syria-Palestine.
# SENT:  In modern times, the term "Syria" alone is used to refer to the Arab Republic of Syria.
# SENT:  During the Hellenistic period, the term Syria was applied to the entire Levant as Coele-Syria.
# SENT:  Under Roman rule, the term was used to refer to the province of Syria, later divided into Syria Phoenicia and Coele Syria, and to the province of Syria Palaestina.
# SENT:  Under the Byzantines, the provinces of Syria Prima and Syria Secunda emerged out of Coele Syria.
# SENT:  After the Muslim conquest of the Levant, the term was superseded by the Arabic equivalent Shām, and under the Rashidun, Umayyad, Abbasid, and Fatimid caliphates, Bilad al-Sham was the name of a metropolitan province encompassing most of the region.
# SENT:  In the 19th century, the name Syria was revived in its modem Arabic form to denote the whole of Bilad al-Sham, either as Suriyah or the modern form Suriyya, which eventually replaced the Arabic name of Bilad al-Sham.After World War I, the boundaries of the region were last defined in modern times by the proclamation of and subsequent definition by French and British mandatory agreement.
# SENT:  The term Syria itself was applied to several mandate states under French rule and the contemporaneous but short-lived Arab Kingdom of Syria.
# SENT:  The Syrian-mandate states were gradually unified as the State of Syria and finally became the independent Syria in 1946.
# SENT:  Throughout this period, pan-Syrian nationalists advocated for the creation of a Greater Syria.
# SENT:  Several sources indicate that the name Syria itself is derived from Luwian term "Sura/i", and the derivative ancient Greek name: Σύριοι, Sýrioi, or Σύροι, Sýroi, both of which originally derived from Aššūrāyu (Assyria) in northern Mesopotamia, modern-day Iraq  For Herodotus in the 5th century BC, Syria extended as far north as the Halys (the modern Kızılırmak River) and as far south as Arabia and Egypt.
# SENT:  For Pliny the Elder and Pomponius Mela, Syria covered the entire Fertile Crescent.
# SENT:  In Late Antiquity, "Syria" meant a region located to the East of the Mediterranean Sea, West of the Euphrates River, North of the Arabian Desert and South of the Taurus Mountains, thereby including modern Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel, the Palestine, and parts of Southern Turkey, namely the Hatay Province and the western half of the Southeastern Anatolia Region.
# SENT:  This late definition is equivalent to the region known in Classical Arabic by the name ash-Shām (Arabic: ٱَلشَّام /ʔaʃ-ʃaːm/, which means the north [country] (from the root šʔm Arabic: شَأْم "left, north")).
# SENT:  After the Islamic conquest of Byzantine Syria in the 7th century CE, the name Syria fell out of primary use in the region itself, being superseded by the Arabic equivalent Shām, but survived in its original sense in Byzantine and Western European usage, and in Syriac Christian literature.
# SENT:  In the 19th century the name Syria was revived in its modem Arabic form to denote the whole of Bilad al-Sham, either as Suriyah or the modern form Suriyya, which eventually replaced the Arabic name of Bilad al-Sham.
# SENT:  After World War I, the name Syria was applied to the French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon and the contemporaneous but short-lived Arab Kingdom of Syria.
# SENT:  This late definition is equivalent to the region known in Classical Arabic by the name ash-Shām (ٱلشَّام /ʔaʃ-ʃaːm/), which means the north [country] (from the root šʔm شَأْم "left, north").
# SENT:  After the Islamic conquest of Byzantine Syria in the seventh century, the name Syria fell out of primary use in the region itself, being superseded by the Arabic equivalent Bilād ash-Shām ("Northern Land'"), but survived in its original sense in Byzantine and Western European usage, and in Syriac Christian literature.
# SENT:  In the 19th century, the name Syria was revived in its modern Arabic form to denote the whole of Bilad al-Sham, either as Suriyah or the modern form Suriyya, which eventually replaced the Arabic name of Bilad al-Sham.
# SENT:  The classical Arabic pronunciation of Syria is Sūriya (as opposed to the Modern Standard Arabic pronunciation Sūrya).
# SENT:  Currently, the Arabic term Sūriya usually refers to the modern state of Syria, as opposed to the historical region of Syria.
# SENT:  The term etymologically in Arabic means "the left-hand side" or "the north", as someone in the Hejaz facing east, oriented to the sunrise, will find the north to the left.
# SENT:  Quran 106:2 alludes to this practice of caravans traveling to Syria in the summer, to avoid the colder weather, and to likewise sell commodities in Yemen in the winter.There is no connection with the name Shem, son of Noah, whose name usually appears in Arabic as سَام Sām, with a different initial consonant and without any internal glottal stop.
# SENT:  Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic by Hans Wehr (4th edition, 1994).
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Syria
# SENT:  Arabic — made official under Umayyad rule – became the dominant language, replacing Greek and Aramaic in the Abbasid era.
# SENT:  The court of Saif al-Daula (944–967) was a center of culture, thanks to its nurturing of Arabic literature.
# SENT:  Ottoman rule was not burdensome to the Syrians because the Turks, as Muslims, respected Arabic as the language of the Koran, and accepted the mantle of defenders of the faith.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syrian_Arab
# SENT:  Syria (Arabic: سُورِيَا or سُورِيَة, romanized: Sūriyā), officially the Syrian Arab Republic (Arabic: الجمهورية العربية السورية, romanized: al-Jumhūrīyah al-ʻArabīyah as-Sūrīyah), is a Western Asian country located in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Levant.
# SENT:  It was suspended from the Arab League in November 2011 and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and self-suspended from the Union for the Mediterranean.The name "Syria" historically referred to a wider region, broadly synonymous with the Levant, and known in Arabic as al-Sham.
# SENT:  Arabic – made official under Umayyad rule – became the dominant language, replacing Greek and Aramaic of the Byzantine era.
# SENT:  The Ottoman system was not burdensome to Syrians because the Turks respected Arabic as the language of the Quran, and accepted the mantle of defenders of the faith.
# SENT:  Arabic is the official language of the country.
# SENT:  Several modern Arabic dialects are used in everyday life, most notably Levantine in the west and Mesopotamian in the northeast.
# SENT:  According to The Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, in addition to Arabic, the following languages are spoken in the country, in order of the number of speakers: Kurdish, Turkish, Neo-Aramaic (four dialects), Circassian, Chechen, Armenian, and finally Greek.
# SENT:  However, none of these minority languages have official status.Aramaic was the lingua franca of the region before the advent of Arabic, and is still spoken among Assyrians, and Classical Syriac is still used as the liturgical language of various Syriac Christian denominations.
# SENT:  The literature of Syria has contributed to Arabic literature and has a proud tradition of oral and written poetry.
# SENT:  The Arabic flatbread khubz is always eaten together with meze.
# SENT:  Arabic coffee is the most well-known hot drink, usually prepared in the morning at breakfast or in the evening.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syrian_civil_war
# SENT:  The Syrian civil war (Arabic: الْحَرْبُ الْأَهْلِيَّةُ السُّورِيَّةُ, romanized: al-ḥarb al-ʾahlīyah as-sūrīyah) is an ongoing multi-sided civil war in Syria fought between the Syrian Arab Republic led by Syrian president Bashar al-Assad (supported by domestic and foreign allies) and various domestic and foreign forces that oppose both the Syrian government and each other, in varying combinations.Unrest in Syria began on 15 March 2011 as part of the wider 2011 Arab Spring protests out of discontent with the Syrian government, eventually escalating to an armed conflict after protests calling for Assad's removal were violently suppressed.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arabic
# SENT:  The Arabs (singular: Arab; singular Arabic: عَرَبِيٌّ, DIN 31635: arabīyun, Arabic pronunciation: [ˈʕarabiːjun], plural Arabic: عَرَب, DIN 31635: ʿarab, Arabic pronunciation: [ˈʕarab] (listen)), also known as the Arab people, are an ethnic group mainly inhabiting the Arab world in Western Asia and North Africa, and to a lesser extent the Horn of Africa, and the western Indian Ocean islands (including the Comoros).
# SENT:  In modern usage, the term "Arab" tends to refer to those from Arab nations, who both carry that ethnic identity and speak Arabic as their native language.
# SENT:  The religion of Islam was developed in Arabia, and Classical Arabic serves as the language of Islamic and Arabic literature.
# SENT:  Before the expansion of the Rashidun Caliphate, the term "Arab" referred to any of the both largely nomadic and settled Arabic-speaking people from the Arabian Peninsula, the Syrian Desert, and Lower Mesopotamia, with some even reaching what is now northern Iraq.
# SENT:  Since the height of pan-Arabism in the 1950s and 1960s, "Arabs" has been taken to refer to a large number of people whose native regions became part of the Arab world due to the spread of Islam, which saw the expansion of Arab tribes and the Arabic language throughout during the early Muslim conquests of the 7th and 8th centuries.
# SENT:  People of non-Arab ethnicities associated with non-Arabic languages also live in these countries, sometimes as a majority; these include Somalis, Kurds, Berbers, the Afar people, Nubians, and various others.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:28, WORD1_SENTS:35, WORD2_SENTS:22
# WORDPAIR: Rajasthan Jaipur
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rajasthan
# SENT:  Rajasthan (Hindi: [raːdʒəsˈtʰaːn] (listen); lit.
# SENT:  Its major features include the ruins of the Indus Valley civilisation at Kalibangan and Balathal, the Dilwara Temples, a Jain pilgrimage site at Rajasthan's only hill station, Mount Abu, in the ancient Aravalli mountain range and eastern Rajasthan, the Keoladeo National Park of Bharatpur, a World Heritage Site known for its bird life.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is also home to three national tiger reserves, the Ranthambore National Park in Sawai Madhopur, Sariska Tiger Reserve in Alwar and the Mukundra Hills Tiger Reserve in Kota.
# SENT:  Its capital and largest city is Jaipur.
# SENT:  The economy of Rajasthan is the seventh-largest state economy in India with ₹10.20 lakh crore (US$130 billion) in gross domestic product and a per capita GDP of ₹118,000 (US$1,500).
# SENT:  Rajasthan ranks 29th among Indian states in human development index.
# SENT:  Rajasthan literally means "The Land of Kings" and is a portmanteau of Sanskrit "Rājā" (King) and Sanskrit "Sthāna"(Land) or Persian "St(h)ān" with the same meaning.
# SENT:  The oldest reference to Rajasthan is found in a stone inscription dated back to 625 CE.
# SENT:  The first printed mention of the name Rajasthan appears in the 1829 publication Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan or the Central and Western Rajpoot States of India, while the earliest known record of Rajputana as a name for the region is in George Thomas's 1800 memoir Military Memories.
# SENT:  Parts of what is now Rajasthan were partly part of the Vedic Civilisation and the Indus Valley civilization.
# SENT:  Stone Age tools dating from 5,000 to 200,000 years were found in Bundi and Bhilwara districts of the state.The Matsya kingdom of the Vedic civilisation of India is said to roughly corresponded to the former state of Jaipur in Rajasthan and included the whole of Alwar with portions of Bharatpur.
# SENT:  The capital of Matsya was at Viratanagar (modern Bairat), which is said to have been named after its founder King Virata.Bhargava identifies the two districts of Jhunjhunu and Sikar and parts of Jaipur district along with Haryana districts of Mahendragarh and Rewari as part of Vedic state of Brahmavarta.
# SENT:  The ashrams of Vedic seers Bhrigu and his son Chayvan Rishi, for whom Chyawanprash was formulated, were near Dhosi Hill, part of which lies in Dhosi village of Jhunjhunu district of Rajasthan and part of which lies in Mahendragarh district of Haryana.The Western Kshatrapas (405–35 BCE), the Saka rulers of the western part of India, were successors to the Indo-Scythians and were contemporaneous with the Kushans, who ruled the northern part of the Indian subcontinent.
# SENT:  After the defeat of Chauhan in 1192 CE, a part of Rajasthan came under Muslim rulers.
# SENT:  At the beginning of the 13th century, the most prominent and powerful state of Rajasthan was Mewar.
# SENT:  Rana Hammir Singh, defeated the Tughlaq dynasty and recovered a large portion of Rajasthan.
# SENT:  After Rana Sanga's death, Marwar rose as a power center in Rajasthan under Rao Maldev Rathore.
# SENT:  He won 22 battles against Afghans, from Punjab to Bengal including the states of Ajmer and Alwar in Rajasthan, and defeated Akbar's forces twice, first at Agra and then at Delhi in 1556 at Battle of Delhi before acceding to the throne of Delhi and establishing the "Hindu Raj" in North India, albeit for a short duration, from Purana Quila in Delhi.
# SENT:  Maharana Pratap soon became the most celebrated warrior of Rajasthan and became famous all over India for his sporadic warfare and noble actions.
# SENT:  They took advantage of the Aravalli hills and caused heavy damage to the Mughal armies that were trying to occupy Rajasthan.After Aurangzeb's death Bahadur Shah I tried to subjugate Rajasthan like his ancestors but his plan backfired when the three Rajput Rajas of Amber, Udaipur, and Jodhpur made a joint resistance to the Mughals.
# SENT:  Modern Rajasthan includes most of Rajputana, which comprises the erstwhile nineteen princely states, three chiefships, and the British district of Ajmer-Merwara.
# SENT:  Jaisalmer, Marwar (Jodhpur), Bikaner, Mewar (Chittorgarh), Alwar and Dhundhar (Jaipur) were some of the main Rajput princely states.
# SENT:  The geographic features of Rajasthan are the Thar Desert and the Aravalli Range, which runs through the state from southwest to northeast, almost from one end to the other, for more than 850 kilometres (530 mi).
# SENT:  About three-fifths of Rajasthan lies northwest of the Aravallis, leaving two-fifths on the east and south direction.
# SENT:  Merta City lies in the geographical center of Rajasthan.
# SENT:  The hilly Vagad region, home to the cities of Dungarpur, Pratapgarh, and Banswara lies in southernmost Rajasthan, on the border with Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh.
# SENT:  With the exception of Mount Abu, Vagad is the wettest region in Rajasthan, and the most heavily forested.
# SENT:  North of Hadoti and Mewar lies the Dhundhar region, home to the state capital of Jaipur.
# SENT:  Mewat, the easternmost region of Rajasthan, borders Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.
# SENT:  Eastern and southeastern Rajasthan is drained by the Banas and Chambal rivers, tributaries of the Ganges.
# SENT:  The northwestern portion of Rajasthan is generally sandy and dry.
# SENT:  Tal Chhapar Sanctuary is a very small sanctuary in Sujangarh, Churu District, 210 kilometres (130 mi) from Jaipur in the Shekhawati region.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is also noted for its national parks and wildlife sanctuaries.
# SENT:  Major internet service provider (ISP) and telecom companies are present in Rajasthan including Airtel, Data Infosys Limited, Reliance Limited, Idea, Jio, RailTel Corporation of India, Software Technology Parks of India (STPI), Tata Telecom and Vodafone.
# SENT:  Data Infosys was the first ISP to bring the internet to Rajasthan in April 1999 and OASIS was the first private mobile telephone company.
# SENT:  The politics of Rajasthan are dominated mainly by the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Indian National Congress.
# SENT:  Rajasthan's economy is primarily agricultural and pastoral.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is among the largest producers of edible oils in India and the second-largest producer of oilseeds.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is also the biggest wool-producing state in India and the main opium producer and consumer.
# SENT:  The Indira Gandhi Canal irrigates northwestern Rajasthan.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is the second-largest producer of polyester fibre in India.
# SENT:  Several prominent chemical and engineering companies are located in the city of Kota, in southern Rajasthan.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is pre-eminent in quarrying and mining in India.
# SENT:  Dimensional stone mining is also undertaken in Rajasthan.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is also a part of the Mumbai-Delhi Industrial corridor set to benefit economically.
# SENT:  The state gets 39% of the DMIC, with major districts of Jaipur, Alwar, Kota and Bhilwara benefiting.Rajasthan also has reserves of low-silica limestone.Rajasthan connected 100% of its population to electricity power in 2019 (raising the rate of electricity access from 71% of the population in 2015).
# SENT:  Rajasthan is connected by many national highways, the most renowned being NH 8, which is India's first 4–8 lane highway.
# SENT:  Rajasthan also has an inter-city surface transport system both in terms of railways and bus network.
# SENT:  There are six main airports at Rajasthan – Jaipur International Airport, Jodhpur Airport, Udaipur Airport and the recently started Ajmer Airport, Bikaner Airport and Jaisalmer Airport.
# SENT:  These airports connect Rajasthan with the major cities of India such as Delhi and Mumbai.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is connected with the main cities of India by rail.
# SENT:  Jaipur, Kota, Ajmer, Jodhpur, Bharatpur, Bikaner, Alwar, Abu Road, and Udaipur are the principal railway stations in Rajasthan.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is well-connected to the main cities of the country including Delhi, Ahmedabad and Indore by state and national highways and served by Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation (RSRTC) and private operators.
# SENT:  Now in March 2017, 75 per cent of all national highways are being built in Rajasthan according to the public works minister of Rajasthan.
# SENT:  According to the 2011 Census of India, Rajasthan has a total population of 68,548,437.
# SENT:  The Ghoomar dance from Jaipur, Jodhpur, and Kalbelia of the Kalbelia tribe has gained international recognition.
# SENT:  Rajasthan is home to many attractions for domestic and foreign travellers, including the forts and palaces of Jaipur, the lakes of Udaipur, the temples of Rajsamand and Pali, sand dunes of Jaisalmer and Bikaner, Havelis of Mandawa and Fatehpur, the wildlife of Sawai Madhopur, the scenic beauty of Mount Abu, the tribes of Dungarpur and Banswara, and the cattle fair of Pushkar.
# SENT:  Rajasthan's Jaipur Jantar Mantar, Mehrangarh Fort and Stepwell of Jodhpur, Dilwara Temples, Chittor Fort, Lake Palace, miniature paintings in Bundi, and numerous city palaces and Havelis are part of the architectural heritage of India.
# SENT:  Jaipur, the Pink City, is noted for the ancient houses made of a type of sandstone dominated by a pink hue.
# SENT:  Mewar festival of Udaipur, Teej festival and Gangaur festival in Jaipur, Desert festival of Jodhpur, Brij Holi of Bharatpur, Matsya festival of Alwar, Kite festival of Jodhpur, Kolayat fair in Bikaner are some of the most popular fairs and festivals of Rajasthan.
# SENT:  Jain Pustak Mandir, Jaipur.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Jaipur
# SENT:  Jaipur, the capital of Rajasthan state in India, was founded in 1727 by Maharaj Sawai Jai Singh II, who ruled Jaipur State from 1699–1744.
# SENT:  He consulted several books on architecture and architects before making the layout of Jaipur.
# SENT:  In 1876, when Prince of Wales visited Jaipur, the whole city was painted pink to welcome him and after that Jaipur was titled ‘Pink City’.
# SENT:  Jaipur is rich in its cultural and architectural beauty, which can be traced in the various historical and aesthetic places that reside in the city.
# SENT:  "Jaipur City (or Jainagar)".
# SENT:  "Jaipur State".
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaipur
# SENT:  Jaipur ( (listen); Hindi: Jayapura), formerly Jeypore, is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Rajasthan.
# SENT:  Jaipur is also known as the Pink City, due to the dominant colour scheme of its buildings.
# SENT:  Jaipur was founded in 1727 by the Kachhwaha Rajput ruler Jai Singh II, the ruler of Amer, after whom the city is named.
# SENT:  During the British Colonial period, the city served as the capital of Jaipur State.
# SENT:  After independence in 1947, Jaipur was made the capital of the newly formed state of Rajasthan.
# SENT:  Jaipur is a popular tourist destination in India and forms a part of the west Golden Triangle tourist circuit along with Delhi and Agra (240 km, 149 mi).
# SENT:  On 6 July 2019, UNESCO World Heritage Committee inscribed Jaipur the "Pink City of India" among its World Heritage Sites.
# SENT:  The city of Jaipur was founded by the King of Amber, Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh II on 18 November 1727, who ruled from 1699 to 1743.
# SENT:  He planned to shift his capital from Amber, 11 kilometres (7 mi) to Jaipur to accommodate the growing population and increasing scarcity of water.
# SENT:  Jai Singh consulted several books on architecture and architects while planning the layout of Jaipur.
# SENT:  Under the architectural guidance of Vidyadhar Bhattacharya, Jaipur was planned based on the principles of Vastu Shastra and Shilpa Shastra.
# SENT:  Many of the avenues still remain painted in pink, giving Jaipur a distinctive appearance and the epithet Pink city.In the 19th century, the city grew rapidly and by 1900 it had a population of 160,000.
# SENT:  Jaipur has a monsoon-influenced hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification BSh) with long, extremely hot summers and short, mild to warm winters.
# SENT:  Jaipur, like many other major cities of the world, is a significant urban heat island zone with surrounding rural temperatures occasionally falling below freezing in winters.
# SENT:  According to the provisional report of 2011 census, Jaipur city had a population of 3,073,350.
# SENT:  The official language of Jaipur is Hindi and the additional official language is English.
# SENT:  The Jaipur Municipal Corporation (JMC) was established in the year 1994.
# SENT:  The municipal corporation is headed by a mayor.JMC was recently bifurcated into two Municipal Corporations, namely Greater Jaipur Municipal Corporation and Jaipur Heritage Municipal Corporation.
# SENT:  However, the Local Self Government Department of Rajasthan divided Jaipur into two municipal corporations, namely Greater Jaipur Municipal Corporation and Heritage Jaipur Municipal Corporation, with 150 and 100 wards each, respectively.The latest elections were held in October 2020, which were postponed due to COVID-19.
# SENT:  However, elections for the 100 wards of Jaipur Heritage Municipal Corporation were held on 29 October 2020.The mayor is the elected representative of the city.
# SENT:  The current mayor of Jaipur Municipal Corporation (Greater) is Smt.
# SENT:  Somya Gurjar since 10 November 2020 and the mayor for Jaipur Municipal Corporation (Heritage) is Smt.
# SENT:  The municipal commissioner of Jaipur is Mahendra Soni (IAS).
# SENT:  The key revenue sources for Jaipur municipality are taxes which include House tax, Urban Development tax and octroi compensation.
# SENT:  The masterplan for the city 2025 was created by the Jaipur Development Authority.
# SENT:  Jaipur consists of two parliamentary constituencies Jaipur and Jaipur Rural.
# SENT:  The political party with a majority in Jaipur is the Indian National Congress.
# SENT:  It also has electives from the BJP and INC party.The Jaipur Lok Sabha constituency comprises eight Vidhansabha (legislative assembly) segments, all of which fall partly in Jaipur city.
# SENT:  MLA for Hawa Mahal is Mahesh Joshi from INC, MLA for Vidhyadhar Nagar is Narpat Singh Rajvi from BJP, MLA for Civil Lines is Pratap Singh Khachariyavas from INC, MLA for Kishanpole is Amin Kagzi from INC, MLA for Adarsh Nagar is Rafeek Khan from INC, MLA for Malviya Nagar constituency is Kalicharan Saraf from BJP, MLA for Sanganer constituency is Ashok Lahoty from BJP and lastly the MLA for Bagru is Ganga Devi from INC.The Jaipur Rural Lok Sabha constituency also comprises eight vidhan sabha segments.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:11, WORD1_SENTS:46, WORD2_SENTS:39
# WORDPAIR: Khartoum Sudan
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khartoum_(state)
# SENT:  Khartoum or Khartum ( kar-TOOM; Arabic: الخرطوم, romanized: Al-Khurṭūm, Dinka: Kaartuɔ̈m) is the capital of Sudan.
# SENT:  With a population of 5,274,321, its metropolitan area is the largest in Sudan.
# SENT:  Divided by these two parts of the Nile, Khartoum is a tripartite metropolis with an estimated population of over five million people, consisting of Khartoum proper, and linked by bridges to Khartoum North (الخرطوم بحري al-Kharṭūm Baḥrī) and Omdurman (أم درمان Umm Durmān) to the west.
# SENT:  Khartoum was founded in 1821 as part of Egypt, north of the ancient city of Soba.
# SENT:  While the United Kingdom exerted power over Egypt, it left administration of the Sudan to it until Mahdist forces took over Khartoum.
# SENT:  The British attempted to evacuate Anglo-Egyptian garrisons from Sudan but the Siege of Khartoum in 1884 resulted in the capture of the city by Mahdist forces and a massacre of the defending Anglo-Egyptian garrison.
# SENT:  In 1898 it was reoccupied by British forces, and was the seat of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan government until 1956.That year the city was designated as the capital of an independent Sudan.
# SENT:  In modern times, it has been a site of political unrest, as when three hostages were killed during the Attack on the Saudi Embassy in Khartoum in 1973.
# SENT:  In the 21st century, the Justice and Equality Movement engaged in combat there in 2008 with Sudanese government forces as part of the War in Darfur.
# SENT:  The Khartoum massacre occurred in 2019 during the Sudanese Revolution.
# SENT:  Khartoum is an economic and trade centre in Northern Africa, with rail lines from Port Sudan and El-Obeid.
# SENT:  It is served by Khartoum International Airport, and Khartoum New International Airport is under construction.
# SENT:  Several national and cultural institutions are in Khartoum and its metropolitan area, including the National Museum of Sudan, the Khalifa House Museum, the University of Khartoum, and the Sudan University of Science and Technology.
# SENT:  The origin of the word Khartoum is uncertain.
# SENT:  This is supported by historical accounts which place the Dinka homeland in central Sudan (around present-day Khartoum) as recently as the 13th-17th centuries A.D.Captain J.A.
# SENT:  Grant, who reached Khartoum in 1863 with Captain Speke's expedition, thought the name was most probably from the Arabic qurtum (قرطم, "safflower", i.e., Carthamus tinctorius), which was cultivated extensively in Egypt for its oil to be used as fuel.
# SENT:  Other Beja scholars suggest Khartoum is derived from the Beja word hartoom, "meeting".
# SENT:  Sociologist Vincent J. Donovan notes that in the Nilotic Maa language of the Maasai people, khartoum means "we have acquired" and that the geographical location of Khartoum is where Maasai oral tradition claims that the ancestors of the Maasai first acquired cattle.
# SENT:  In 1821, Khartoum was established 24 kilometres (15 mi) north of the ancient city of Soba, by Ismail Kamil Pasha, the third son of Egypt's ruler, Muhammad Ali Pasha, who had just incorporated Sudan into his realm.
# SENT:  Originally, Khartoum served as an outpost for the Egyptian Army, but the settlement quickly grew into a regional centre of trade.
# SENT:  Later, it became the administrative center and official capital of Sudan.
# SENT:  On 13 March 1884, troops loyal to the Mahdi Muhammad Ahmad started a siege of Khartoum, against defenders led by British General Charles George Gordon.
# SENT:  The Arab League summit of 29 August 1967 was held in Khartoum as the fourth Arab League Summit.
# SENT:  A 1973 United States Department of State document, declassified in 2006, concluded: "The Khartoum operation was planned and carried out with the full knowledge and personal approval of Yasser Arafat.
# SENT:  "In 1977, the first oil pipeline between Khartoum and the Port of Sudan was completed.The Organisation of African Unity summit of 18–22 July 1978 was held in Khartoum, during which Sudan was awarded the OAU presidency.
# SENT:  Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Khartoum was the destination of hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing conflicts in neighboring nations such as Chad, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Uganda.
# SENT:  Since the mid-1980s, large numbers of refugees from South Sudan and Darfur, fleeing the violence of the Second Sudanese Civil War and Darfur conflict, have settled around Khartoum.
# SENT:  Following the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings, the United States accused bin Laden's al-Qaeda group and, on 20 August, launched cruise missile attacks on the al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory in Khartoum North.
# SENT:  The factory's destruction created diplomatic tension between the U.S. and Sudan.
# SENT:  The residents, deemed squatters, were mostly southern Sudanese whom the government feared could be potential rebel sympathizers.
# SENT:  Around 425,000 people were placed in five "Peace Camps" in the desert an hour's drive from Khartoum.
# SENT:  The sudden death of SPLA head and vice-president of Sudan, John Garang, at the end of July 2005, was followed by three days of violent riots in the capital.
# SENT:  Order was finally restored after Southern Sudanese politicians and tribal leaders sent strong messages to the rioters.
# SENT:  The situation could have been much more dire; even so, the death toll was at least 24, as youths from southern Sudan attacked northern Sudanese and clashed with security forces.The African Union summit of 16–24 January 2006 was held in Khartoum; as was the Arab League summit of 28–29 March 2006, during which they awarded Sudan the Arab League presidency.On 10 May 2008, the Darfur rebel group, Justice and Equality Movement, moved into the city, where they engaged in heavy fighting with Sudanese government forces.
# SENT:  Their soldiers included minors, and their goal was to topple Omar al-Bashir's government, though the Sudanese government succeeded in beating back the assault.On 23 October 2012, an explosion at the Yarmouk munitions factory killed two people and injured another person.
# SENT:  The Sudanese government has claimed that the explosion was the result of an Israeli airstrike.On 3 June 2019, Khartoum was the site of the Khartoum massacre, where over 100 dissidents were murdered (the government said 61 were killed), hundreds more injured and 70 women raped by Rapid Support Forces (RSF) in order to forcefully disperse the peaceful protests calling for civilian government.On 1 July 2020, activists demanded that al-Zibar Basha street in Khartoum be renamed.
# SENT:  Al-Zubayr Rahma Mansur was a slave trader and the al-Zibar Basha street leads to the military base where the 2019 Khartoum massacre took place.On 26 October 2021, the city was locked down following a military coup that left at least 7 dead, triggering protests and calls for a general strike.
# SENT:  Khartoum is located in the middle of the populated areas in Sudan, at almost the northeast center of the country between 15 and 16 degrees latitude north, and between 31 and 32 degrees longitude east.
# SENT:  Khartoum marks the convergence of the White Nile and the Blue Nile, where they join to form the bottom of the leaning-S shape of the main Nile (see map, upper right) as it zigzags through northern Sudan into Egypt at Lake Nasser.
# SENT:  Khartoum is relatively flat, at elevation 385 m (1,263 ft), as the Nile flows northeast past Omdurman to Shendi, at elevation 364 m (1,194 ft) about 101 miles (163 km) away.
# SENT:  Khartoum features a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification BWh) with a dry season occurring during winter, typical of the Saharo-Sahelian zone, which marks the progressive passage between the Sahara Desert's vast arid areas and the Sahel's vast semi-arid areas.
# SENT:  Khartoum records on average six days with 10 mm (0.39 in) or more and 19 days with 1 mm (0.039 in) or more of rainfall.
# SENT:  Temperatures cool off somewhat during the night, with Khartoum's lowest average low temperature of the year, in January, just above 15 °C (59 °F).
# SENT:  Khartoum is one of the hottest major cities on Earth, with annual mean temperatures hovering around 30 °C (86 °F).
# SENT:  Almost 250,000 Syrians lived in Khartoum as of 2019, representing 5% of the total population of the city.
# SENT:  Sudan was the only country in the world to accept travelers carrying a Syrian passport who lacked a visa.
# SENT:  After the signing of the historic Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the government of Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLA), the Government of Sudan began a massive development project.
# SENT:  In 2007, the biggest projects in Khartoum were the Al-Mogran Development Project, two five-star hotels, a new airport, El Mek Nimr Bridge (finished in October 2007) and the Tuti Bridge that links Khartoum to Tuti Island.
# SENT:  In the 21st century, Khartoum developed based on Sudan's oil wealth (although the independence of South Sudan in 2011 affected the economy of Sudan negatively).
# SENT:  Khartoum has the highest concentration of economic activity in the country.
# SENT:  This has changed as major economic developments take place in other parts of the country, like oil exploration in the South, the Giad Industrial Complex in Al Jazirah state and White Nile Sugar Project in Central Sudan, and the Merowe Dam in the North.
# SENT:  Petroleum products are now produced in the far north of Khartoum state, providing fuel and jobs for the city.
# SENT:  One of Sudan's largest refineries is located in northern Khartoum.
# SENT:  The Souq Al Arabi is Khartoum's largest open air market.
# SENT:  The "souq" is spread over several blocks in the center of Khartoum proper just south of the Great Mosque (Mesjid al-Kabir) and the minibus station.
# SENT:  It is divided into separate sections, including one focused entirely on gold.Al Qasr Street and Al Jamhoriyah Street are considered the most famous high streets in Khartoum State.
# SENT:  In 2011, Sudan opened the Hotel Section and part of the food court of the new, Corinthia Hotel Tower.
# SENT:  Khartoum is the main location for most of Sudan's top educational bodies.
# SENT:  There are many universities in Khartoum, including the University of Khartoum and Sudan University of Science and Technology.
# SENT:  Khartoum is home to the largest airport in Sudan, Khartoum International Airport.
# SENT:  It is the main hub for Sudan Airways, Sudan's main carrier.
# SENT:  A new airport was planned for the southern outskirts of the city, but with Khartoum's rapid growth and consequent urban sprawl, the airport is still located in the heart of the city.
# SENT:  Khartoum's transportation is limited to the vehicular road system, with buses and personal vehicles comprising the main types of vehicles.
# SENT:  As with many cities in the continent, parts of Khartoum are connected through privately owned buses.Khartoum has a number of bridges across both tributaries of the Nile.
# SENT:  Khartoum has rail lines from Wadi Halfa, Port Sudan on the Red Sea, and El Obeid.
# SENT:  All are operated by Sudan Railways.
# SENT:  The architecture of Khartoum reflects the city's history since the early 1820s and is marked by both native Sudanese, Turkish, British and modern buildings.
# SENT:  In general, the architecture of Sudan reflects a wide diversity in its shapes, materials, and use.
# SENT:  Since independence, the people of Sudan have introduced new infrastructure and technology, which has led to new and innovative building concepts, ideas and construction techniques.
# SENT:  The largest museum in Sudan is the National Museum of Sudan.
# SENT:  Founded in 1971, it contains works from different epochs of Sudanese history.
# SENT:  There are also Christian churches and temples: St. Matthew's Cathedral, Khartoum, Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Khartoum (Catholic Church), Sudan Interior Church (Baptist World Alliance), and Presbyterian Church in Sudan (World Communion of Reformed Churches).
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khartoum
# SENT:  Khartoum or Khartum ( kar-TOOM; Arabic: الخرطوم, romanized: Al-Khurṭūm, Dinka: Kaartuɔ̈m) is the capital of Sudan.
# SENT:  With a population of 5,274,321, its metropolitan area is the largest in Sudan.
# SENT:  While the United Kingdom exerted power over Egypt, it left administration of the Sudan to it until Mahdist forces took over Khartoum.
# SENT:  The British attempted to evacuate Anglo-Egyptian garrisons from Sudan but the Siege of Khartoum in 1884 resulted in the capture of the city by Mahdist forces and a massacre of the defending Anglo-Egyptian garrison.
# SENT:  In 1898 it was reoccupied by British forces, and was the seat of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan government until 1956.That year the city was designated as the capital of an independent Sudan.
# SENT:  In the 21st century, the Justice and Equality Movement engaged in combat there in 2008 with Sudanese government forces as part of the War in Darfur.
# SENT:  The Khartoum massacre occurred in 2019 during the Sudanese Revolution.
# SENT:  Khartoum is an economic and trade centre in Northern Africa, with rail lines from Port Sudan and El-Obeid.
# SENT:  Several national and cultural institutions are in Khartoum and its metropolitan area, including the National Museum of Sudan, the Khalifa House Museum, the University of Khartoum, and the Sudan University of Science and Technology.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:28, WORD1_SENTS:31, WORD2_SENTS:22
# WORDPAIR: Sweden Krona
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swedish_krona
# SENT:  The krona (Swedish: [ˈkrûːna] (listen); plural: kronor; sign: kr; code: SEK) is the official currency of the Kingdom of Sweden.
# SENT:  The parties to the union were the Scandinavian countries, where the name was krona in Sweden and krone in Denmark and Norway, which in English literally means "crown".
# SENT:  Replacement banknotes featuring Dag Hammarskjöld became valid on 1 October 2015, but were circulated in considerably fewer quantities (less than 3.5 million), thus reducing the supply of cash in Sweden.
# SENT:  She pointed out that it was very inappropriate to include something by Wagner, whose works were associated with Nazi Germany, in a time of increasing problems with antisemitism in Sweden.
# SENT:  The exchange rate of the Swedish krona against other currencies has historically been dependent on the monetary policy pursued by Sweden at the time.
# SENT:  According to the 1994 accession treaty (effective 1 January 1995), Sweden is required to join the eurozone and therefore must convert to the euro once the convergence criteria are met.
# SENT:  Some of Sweden's major parties continue to believe it would be in the national interest to join, but all parties have pledged to abide by the results of the referendum, and none have shown any interest in raising the issue again.
# SENT:  In February 2009, Fredrik Reinfeldt, the Prime Minister of Sweden, stated that a new referendum on the euro issue will not be held until support is gained from the people and all the major parties.
# SENT:  Sweden is a wealthy country and in the 1970s and 1980s the value of banknotes and coins per capita was one of the highest in the world.
# SENT:  For a discussion of the financial and banking crisis that hit Sweden in the early 1990s see the article History of Sweden (1991–present) and Swedish banking rescue.
# SENT:  Unlike the United States, which by policy never declares issued money invalid, Sweden and most other European countries have a date when older series of banknotes or older coin designs are invalid and are no longer legal tender.
# SENT:  Also the Swish mobile payment system was established in Sweden in 2012 and become a popular alternative to cash payments.
# SENT:  Although many countries are performing larger and larger share of transactions by electronic means, Sweden is unique in that it is also reducing its cash in circulation by a significant percentage.
# SENT:  According to Bank for International Settlements the last year Sweden was surpassed in cash on a per capita basis converted to United States dollars by USA in 1993, the Euro Area in 2003, Australia in 2007, Canada in 2009, United Kingdom and Saudi Arabia in 2013, South Korea in 2014, Russia in 2016, and Mexico in 2019.
# SENT:  As of 2019 Sweden is still circulating more cash per person (converted to USD) than Argentina, Brazil, Turkey, India, Indonesia, and South Africa.
# SENT:  Possible discrepancies with these statistics and other sources may be because some sources exclude "commemorative banknotes and coins" (3.20% of total for Sweden in 2015) and other sources exclude "banknotes and coin held by banks" (2.68% of total for Sweden in 2015) as opposed "banknotes and coin in circulation outside banks".
# SENT:  Speculation about Sweden declaring all banknotes and coins invalid at some future date is widespread in the media with Björn Ulvaeus as a celebrity advocate of a cashless Sweden which he believes will result in a safer society because simple robbery will involve stealing goods that must be fenced.The value of the payments between households, companies and authorities in Sweden amounts to about 20,000 kronor annual per capita in cash.
# SENT:  It is different from the electronic transfers using commercial bank money as central bank money has no nominal credit risk, as it stands for a claim on the central bank, which cannot go bankrupt, at least not for debts in Swedish krona.The declining use of cash in Sweden is going to be reinforced cyclically.
# SENT:  "The declining use of cash in Sweden means that this is more of a burning issue for us than for most other central banks.
# SENT:  It is our statutory duty and we will of course continue to live up to it," concluded Deputy Governor Cecilia Skingsley.In December 2020, Sweden's Minister for Financial Markets Per Bolund announced a government review to explore the feasibility of moving to a digital currency that was expected to be completed by the end of November in 2022.
# SENT:  Historical and current banknotes of Sweden (in English and German)
# PAGE:  https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q122922
# PAGE:  https://www.wikiwand.com/simple/Swedish_krona
# SENT:  The krona (Swedish: [ˈkrûːna] (listen); plural: kronor; sign: kr; code: SEK) is the official currency of the Kingdom of Sweden.
# SENT:  The parties to the union were the Scandinavian countries, where the name was krona in Sweden and krone in Denmark and Norway, which in English literally means "crown".
# SENT:  Replacement banknotes featuring Dag Hammarskjöld became valid on 1 October 2015, but were circulated in considerably fewer quantities (less than 3.5 million), thus reducing the supply of cash in Sweden.
# SENT:  She pointed out that it was very inappropriate to include something by Wagner, whose works were associated with Nazi Germany, in a time of increasing problems with antisemitism in Sweden.
# SENT:  The exchange rate of the Swedish krona against other currencies has historically been dependent on the monetary policy pursued by Sweden at the time.
# SENT:  According to the 1994 accession treaty (effective 1 January 1995), Sweden is required to join the eurozone and therefore must convert to the euro once the convergence criteria are met.
# SENT:  Some of Sweden's major parties continue to believe it would be in the national interest to join, but all parties have pledged to abide by the results of the referendum, and none have shown any interest in raising the issue again.
# SENT:  In February 2009, Fredrik Reinfeldt, the Prime Minister of Sweden, stated that a new referendum on the euro issue will not be held until support is gained from the people and all the major parties.
# SENT:  Sweden is a wealthy country and in the 1970s and 1980s the value of banknotes and coins per capita was one of the highest in the world.
# SENT:  For a discussion of the financial and banking crisis that hit Sweden in the early 1990s see the article History of Sweden (1991–present) and Swedish banking rescue.
# SENT:  Unlike the United States, which by policy never declares issued money invalid, Sweden and most other European countries have a date when older series of banknotes or older coin designs are invalid and are no longer legal tender.
# SENT:  Also the Swish mobile payment system was established in Sweden in 2012 and become a popular alternative to cash payments.
# SENT:  Although many countries are performing larger and larger share of transactions by electronic means, Sweden is unique in that it is also reducing its cash in circulation by a significant percentage.
# SENT:  According to Bank for International Settlements the last year Sweden was surpassed in cash on a per capita basis converted to United States dollars by USA in 1993, the Euro Area in 2003, Australia in 2007, Canada in 2009, United Kingdom and Saudi Arabia in 2013, South Korea in 2014, Russia in 2016, and Mexico in 2019.
# SENT:  As of 2019 Sweden is still circulating more cash per person (converted to USD) than Argentina, Brazil, Turkey, India, Indonesia, and South Africa.
# SENT:  Possible discrepancies with these statistics and other sources may be because some sources exclude "commemorative banknotes and coins" (3.20% of total for Sweden in 2015) and other sources exclude "banknotes and coin held by banks" (2.68% of total for Sweden in 2015) as opposed "banknotes and coin in circulation outside banks".
# SENT:  Speculation about Sweden declaring all banknotes and coins invalid at some future date is widespread in the media with Björn Ulvaeus as a celebrity advocate of a cashless Sweden which he believes will result in a safer society because simple robbery will involve stealing goods that must be fenced.The value of the payments between households, companies and authorities in Sweden amounts to about 20,000 kronor annual per capita in cash.
# SENT:  It is different from the electronic transfers using commercial bank money as central bank money has no nominal credit risk, as it stands for a claim on the central bank, which cannot go bankrupt, at least not for debts in Swedish krona.The declining use of cash in Sweden is going to be reinforced cyclically.
# SENT:  "The declining use of cash in Sweden means that this is more of a burning issue for us than for most other central banks.
# SENT:  It is our statutory duty and we will of course continue to live up to it," concluded Deputy Governor Cecilia Skingsley.In December 2020, Sweden's Minister for Financial Markets Per Bolund announced a government review to explore the feasibility of moving to a digital currency that was expected to be completed by the end of November in 2022.
# SENT:  Historical and current banknotes of Sweden (in English and German)
# PAGE:  https://www.pinterest.com/pin/261912534548788655/
# PAGE:  https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/krona
# PAGE:  https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Money_of_Sweden
# PAGE:  https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/payments--cash/e-krona/
# PAGE:  https://www.flickr.com/photos/lukedrich_photography/43932021672/
# PAGE:  https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/sek-swedish-krona.asp
# PAGE:  https://www.reuters.com/article/us-cenbank-digital-sweden-idUSKBN20E26G
# PAGE:  https://wiki.alquds.edu/?query=Talk:Swedish_krona
# PAGE:  https://www.swedbank.com/
# PAGE:  https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Ekrona
# PAGE:  https://www.diakonia.se/en/about-us/
# PAGE:  https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/swedish-krona-falls-to-lowest-against-euro-since-2009-1.1879865
# PAGE:  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/policy_and_exchange_rates/euro_reference_exchange_rates/html/index.en.html
# PAGE:  https://www.latestly.com/socially/business/the-swedish-krona-falls-to-its-lowest-level-against-the-euro-since-2009-as-concerns-rise-latest-tweet-by-bloomberg-4804067.html
# PAGE:  https://www.ngccoin.com/price-guide/world/sweden-krona-km-747-1877-1889-cuid-128933-duid-328292
# WORDPAIR: Tehran Iran
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tehran_(TV_series)
# SENT:  Tehran (Hebrew: טהרן) is an Israeli spy thriller television series created by Moshe Zonder for the Israeli public channel Kan 11.
# SENT:  Featuring dialogue in Hebrew, Persian and English, the series follows an Iranian-Jewish Mossad agent on her first mission in Iran's capital, which is also the place of her birth.
# SENT:  The second season was released on May 6, 2022.At the International Emmy Awards ceremony held in November 2021, Tehran received the award for best drama series, becoming the first ever Israeli series to win this award.
# SENT:  Protagonist Tamar Rabinyan, a young Jewish woman born in Iran but raised in Israel, is a Mossad agent and computer hacker on an undercover mission in the Iranian capital to disable a nuclear reactor.
# SENT:  Her objective is neutralizing Iranian air defenses so that the Israeli Air Force can bomb a nuclear plant and prevent Iran from obtaining an atomic bomb.
# SENT:  When she arrives in Iran she switches identities with Zhila Gorbanifar, a Muslim employee of the local electric company.
# SENT:  Then she tries to cut electric power to the Iranian radar system, in order to facilitate an ongoing Israeli Air Force attack.
# SENT:  Being born in Iran and having moved to Israel when she was six, Tamar now discovers her local roots, goes to see her aunt, and befriends Iranian pro-democracy activists.
# SENT:  Prior to being smuggled out of Iran to start a new life in Canada, Tamar accepts a mission to rescue one of the Israeli pilots captured after the reactor mission.
# SENT:  Tamar's aunt is executed for assisting her, and a devastated Tamar agrees to stay in Tehran with Milad to undertake a new mission: the assassination of Qasem Mohammadi who has been promoted to head of the Revolutionary Guard.
# SENT:  Milad is killed by a car bomb planted by the Mossad in the escape car, leaving Tamar alone and trapped in Iran with no-one to trust.
# SENT:  Production began on October 28, 2019.
# SENT:  Some of the actors playing Iranians were born in Iran, and speak the language as their mother tongue.
# SENT:  Rumors about a possible second season of Tehran began on September 10, 2020, when it was announced that co-creator Moshe Zonder signed a multi-year "first look" deal to create projects for Apple TV+.In December 2020, executive producer Julien Leroux said that production had begun on a second season though it had not been officially approved.
# SENT:  Tehran has received positive reviews from critics.
# SENT:  The site's critical consensus reads, "Tehran's expertly plotted twists further elevate a geopolitical thriller deftly balanced between the global and the personal."
# SENT:  Tehran on Kan 11 website (he), including stream of all aired episodes
# SENT:  Tehran at Apple TV+
# SENT:  Tehran at IMDb 
# SENT:  Tehran at Metacritic 
# SENT:  Tehran at Rotten Tomatoes
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geography_of_Iran
# SENT:  Geographically, the country of Iran is located in West Asia and borders the Caspian Sea, Persian Gulf, and Gulf of Oman.
# SENT:  With an area of 1,648,000 square kilometres (636,000 sq mi), Iran ranks seventeenth in size among the countries of the world.
# SENT:  Iran shares its northern borders with several post-Soviet states: Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Turkmenistan.
# SENT:  Iran's western borders are with Turkey in the north and Iraq in the south, terminating at the Arvand Rud.
# SENT:  Iran's diagonal distance from Azerbaijan in the northwest to Sistan and Baluchestan Province in the southeast is approximately 2,333 kilometres (1,450 mi).
# SENT:  The topography of Iran consists of rugged, mountainous rims surrounding high interior basins.
# SENT:  As the Zagros continue into southeastern Iran, the average elevation of the peaks declines dramatically to under 1,500 metres (4,921 ft).
# SENT:  The center of Iran consists of several closed basins that collectively are referred to as the Central Plateau.
# SENT:  Parts of northwestern Iran are part of the Armenian highlands, which adjoins it topographically with other parts of neighbouring Turkey, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia.Iran has only two expanses of lowlands: the Khuzestan Plain in the southwest and the Caspian Sea coastal plain in the north.
# SENT:  There are also several connected salt lakes along the Iran-Afghanistan border in the province of Baluchestan va Sistan.
# SENT:  Iran's highlands are home to some of the world's most unexpected glaciers.
# SENT:  A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,481 km² of tidal flats in Iran, making it the 22nd ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.
# SENT:  Iran has a variable climate.
# SENT:  In general, Iran has a continental climate in which most of the relatively scant annual precipitation falls from October through April.
# SENT:  Iran is considered colder than neighboring countries such as Iraq and Turkmenistan, due to its higher elevation.
# SENT:  According to FAO reports, the major types of forests that exist in Iran and their respective areas are:
# SENT:  Sub-tropical forests of the southern coast, like the Hara forests – 5,000 km2 (1,900 sq mi)Wildlife of Iran is diverse and composed of several animal species including bears, gazelles, wild pigs, wolves, jackals, panthers, Eurasian lynx, and foxes.
# SENT:  The pheasant, partridge, stork, eagles and falcon are also native to Iran.
# SENT:  As of 2001, 20 of Iran's mammal species and 14 bird species are endangered.
# SENT:  The Asiatic cheetah is a critically endangered species which is extinct elsewhere and now can only be found in central to northeastern parts of Iran.
# SENT:  Iran lost all its Asiatic lions and Caspian tigers by the earlier part of the 20th century.
# SENT:  The pheasant, partridge, stork, and falcon are native to Iran.
# SENT:  The main range of this species in Iran closely overlaps with that of bezoar ibex.
# SENT:  Hence, it is found throughout Alborz and Zagros mountain ranges, as well as smaller ranges within the Iranian plateau.
# SENT:  Apart from bezoar ibex, wild sheep, boar, deer, (either Caspian red deer or roe deer), and domestic animals constitute leopards' diet in Iran.
# SENT:  Iran's bio-diversity ranks 13th in the world.
# SENT:  There are 272 conservation areas around Iran for a total of 17 million hectares under the supervision of the Department of Environment (Iran), variously named national parks, protected areas, and natural wildlife refuges, all meant to protect the genetic resources of the country.
# SENT:  Iran is currently engaged in international territorial disputes with several neighbouring countries.
# SENT:  Iran and the United Arab Emirates have a territorial dispute over the Greater and Lesser Tunbs and Abu Musa islands, which are administered by Iran.
# SENT:  Iran currently insists on dividing the Caspian Sea resources equally among the five littoral states, after the Russian-backed former soviet breakaway republics refused to respect the 50-50 agreements between Iran and the Soviet Union (despite their international obligation).
# SENT:  Iran: A Country Study.
# SENT:  Geography of Persia, Encyclopædia Iranica:
# SENT:  Iran in Maps – BBC (population, land, infrastructure)
# SENT:  Iran Geography
# SENT:  Flora of Iran by Pr Ahmad GHAHREMAN
# SENT:  Persia (Iran), Afghanistan and Baluchistan is a map from 1897
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Iran
# SENT:  The history of Iran is intertwined with the history of a larger region known as Greater Iran, comprising the area from Anatolia in the west to the borders of Ancient India and the Syr Darya in the east, and from the Caucasus and the Eurasian Steppe in the north to the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman in the south.
# SENT:  Central to this area is Iran, commonly known until the mid-20th century as Persia in the Western world.
# SENT:  Iran is home to one of the world's oldest continuous major civilizations, with historical and urban settlements dating back to 4000 BC.
# SENT:  The south-western and western part of the Iranian plateau participated in the traditional ancient Near East with Elam (3200–539 BC), from the Bronze Age, and later with various other peoples, such as the Kassites, Mannaeans, and Gutians.
# SENT:  A serious internal threat to the Seljuqs during their reign came from the Nizari Ismailis, a secret sect with headquarters at Alamut Castle between Rasht and Tehran.
# SENT:  Its monarch Rezā Shāh was deposed during the subsequent occupation and replaced with his young son Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.At the Tehran Conference of 1943, the Allies issued the Tehran Declaration which guaranteed the post-war independence and boundaries of Iran.
# SENT:  Its time span can be said to have begun in January 1978 with the first major demonstrations, and concluded with the approval of the new theocratic Constitution—whereby Ayatollah Khomeini became Supreme Leader of the country—in December 1979.In between, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi left the country for exile in January 1979 after strikes and demonstrations paralyzed the country, and on February 1, 1979 Ayatollah Khomeini returned to Tehran.
# SENT:  This rift reached a climax in July 1999 when massive anti-government protests erupted in the streets of Tehran.
# SENT:  In June 2003, anti-government protests by several thousand students took place in Tehran.
# SENT:  In the 2005 Iranian presidential election, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, mayor of Tehran, became the sixth president of Iran, after winning 62 percent of the vote in the run-off poll, against former president Ali-Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani.
# SENT:  Bournoutian, George A.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Government_of_Iran
# SENT:  Ayatollah Khomeini would return in February of the same year after a long period of exile, greeted in the capital of Tehran by several million Iranians.
# SENT:  They presented their arguments by rendering lectures in 1960 and 1963 in Tehran.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Politics_of_Iran
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographics_of_Iran
# SENT:  1 The population of the provinces of Alborz and Tehran for 2006 and their average annual growth have been calculated based on the data of 2011.
# SENT:  1 The population of the provinces of Alborz and Tehran for 2006 and their average annual growth have been calculated based on the data of 2011.
# SENT:  Most of those Georgians who live in the north Iranian provinces of Gilan, Mazandaran, Isfahan, Tehran Province and the rest of Iran no longer speak the language.
# SENT:  According to the Tehran Jewish Committee, the Jewish population of Iran was (more recently) estimated at 25,000 to 35,000, of which approximately 15,000 are in Tehran with the rest residing in Hamadan, Shiraz, Isfahan, Kermanshah, Yazd, Kerman, Rafsanjan, Borujerd, Sanandaj, Tabriz and Urmia.
# SENT:  According to the 2000 Census and other independent surveys, there are an estimated 1 million Iranian-Americans living in the U.S., in particular, the Los Angeles area is estimated to be host to approximately 72,000 Iranians, earning the Westwood area of LA the nickname Tehrangeles.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture_of_Iran
# SENT:  Baháʼís are scattered throughout small communities in Iran, although there seems to be a large population of Baháʼís in Tehran.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bulan,_Tehran
# SENT:  Bulan (Persian: بولان, also Romanized as Būlān, Bolān, Boolan, and Bowlān) is a village in Jamabrud Rural District, in the Central District of Damavand County, Tehran Province, Iran.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy_of_Iran
# SENT:  It is dominated by oil and gas production, although over 40 industries are directly involved in the Tehran Stock Exchange.
# SENT:  Forty percent of such sales are to be conducted through the "Justice Shares" scheme and the rest through the Tehran Stock Exchange.
# SENT:  The official poverty line in Tehran for the year ending March 20, 2008, was $9,612, while the national average poverty line was $4,932.
# SENT:  In 2000, textile mills, using domestic cotton and wool such as Tehran Patou and Iran Termeh employed around 400,000 people around Tehran, Isfahan and along the Caspian coast.
# SENT:  Major refineries located at Abadan (site of its first refinery), Kermanshah and Tehran failed to meet domestic demand for gasoline in 2009.
# SENT:  These are especially popular in cities other than Tehran where the number of hypermarkets and supermarkets is still very limited.
# SENT:  In 2010, Iran attracted almost $11.9 billion from abroad, of which $3.6 billion was FDI, $7.4 billion was from international commercial bank loans, and around $900 million consisted of loans and projects from international development banks.As of 2010, the Tehran Stock Exchange traded the shares of more than 330 registered companies.
# SENT:  The Tehran–Bandar-Abbas railroad, opened in 1995, connects Bandar-Abbas to Central Asia via Tehran and Mashhad.
# SENT:  Tehran, Mashhad, Shiraz, Tabriz, Ahvaz and Isfahan are constructing underground railways.
# SENT:  This fall led to a drop in revenues and clashes on the streets of Tehran when the local currency, the rial, collapsed.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India%E2%80%93Iran_relations
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iranian_Revolution
# SENT:  On 1 February 1979, Khomeini returned to Iran, following an invitation by the government; several thousand Iranians gathered to greet him as he landed in the capital city of Tehran.
# SENT:  Against this background a first crucial manifestation of public expression of social discontent and political protest against the regime took place in October 1977, when the German-Iranian Cultural Association in Tehran hosted a series of literature reading sessions, organized by the newly revived Iranian Writers Association and the German Goethe-Institute.
# SENT:  A subsequent memorial service for Mostafa in Tehran put Khomeini back in the spotlight.
# SENT:  Led by the leftist intellectual Saeed Soltanpour, the Iranian Writers Association met at the Goethe Institute in Tehran to read anti-government poetry.
# SENT:  "Forty days later, on 29 March, demonstrations were organized in at least 55 cities, including Tehran.
# SENT:  By summer, the protests had stagnated, remaining at a steady rate for four months, with about 10,000 participants in each major city—with the exception of Isfahan, where protests were larger, and Tehran, where they were smaller—protesting every 40 days.
# SENT:  Instead, the clergy directed the crowd on a large march through the center of Tehran, whilst the Shah reportedly watched the march from his helicopter, unnerved, and confused.
# SENT:  A few days later, even larger protests took place, and, for the first time, protesters called for Khomeini's return and the establishment of an Islamic republic.At midnight on 8 September, the Shah declared martial law in Tehran and 11 other major cities throughout the country.
# SENT:  Tehran's martial law commander was General Gholam-Ali Oveissi, who was known for his severity against opponents.
# SENT:  On 9 September, 700 workers at Tehran's main oil refinery went on strike, and on 11 September, the same occurred at refineries in five other cities.
# SENT:  On 13 September, central government workers in Tehran simultaneously went on strike.By late October, a nationwide general strike was declared, with workers in virtually all major industries walking off their jobs, most damagingly in the oil industry and the print media.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:16, WORD1_SENTS:34, WORD2_SENTS:49
# WORDPAIR: India Asia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Asia
# SENT:  South Asia is the southern subregion of Asia, which is defined in both geographical and ethnic-cultural terms.
# SENT:  The region consists of the countries of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
# SENT:  Topographically, it is dominated by the Indian subcontinent and defined largely by the Indian Ocean on the south, and the Himalayas, Karakoram, and Pamir mountains on the north.
# SENT:  On land (clockwise), South Asia is bounded by Western Asia, Central Asia, East Asia, and Southeast Asia.
# SENT:  The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) is an economic cooperation organization in the region which was established in 1985 and includes all eight nations comprising South Asia.
# SENT:  South Asia covers about 5.2 million km2 (2.0 million sq mi), which is 11.71% of the Asian continent or 3.5% of the world's land surface area.
# SENT:  The population of South Asia is about 1.9 billion or about one-fourth of the world's population, making it both the most populous and the most densely populated geographical region in the world.In 2010, South Asia had the world's largest populations of Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Jains, and Zoroastrians.
# SENT:  South Asia alone accounts for 98.47% of Hindus, 90.5% of Sikhs, and 31% of Muslims worldwide, as well as 35 million Christians and 25 million Buddhists.
# SENT:  Modern definitions of South Asia are consistent in including Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka as the constituent countries.
# SENT:  Afghanistan is, however, considered by some to be a part of Central Asia, Western Asia, or the Middle East.
# SENT:  On the other hand, Myanmar (Burma), administered as a part of the British Raj between 1886 and 1937 and now largely considered a part of Southeast Asia as a member state of ASEAN, is also sometimes included.
# SENT:  But the Aden Colony, British Somaliland and Singapore, though administered at various times under the British Raj, have never been proposed as any part of South Asia.
# SENT:  The region may also include the disputed territory of Aksai Chin, which was part of the British Indian princely state of Jammu and Kashmir, now administered as part of the Chinese autonomous region of Xinjiang but also claimed by India.The geographical extent is not clear cut as systemic and foreign policy orientations of its constituents are quite asymmetrical.
# SENT:  Beyond the core territories of the British Raj or the British Indian Empire, there is a high degree of variation as to which other countries are included in South Asia.
# SENT:  There is no clear boundary – geographical, geopolitical, socio-cultural, economical or historical – between South Asia and other parts of Asia, especially the Middle East and Southeast Asia.The common definition of South Asia is largely inherited from the administrative boundaries of the British Raj, with several exceptions.
# SENT:  The current territories of Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan which were the core territories of the British Empire from 1857 to 1947 also form the core territories of South Asia.
# SENT:  By various definitions based on substantially different reasons, the British Indian Ocean Territory and the Tibet Autonomous Region are included as well.
# SENT:  The 562 princely states that were protected by but not directly ruled by the British Raj became administrative parts of South Asia upon joining India or Pakistan.
# SENT:  The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), a contiguous block of countries, started in 1985 with seven countries – Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka – and admitted Afghanistan as an eighth member in 2007.
# SENT:  The South Asia Free Trade Agreement admitted Afghanistan in 2011.The World Bank and United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) recognizes the eight SAARC countries as South Asia, The Hirschman–Herfindahl index of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific for the region excludes Afghanistan from South Asia.
# SENT:  The United Nations Statistics Division's scheme of sub-regions, for statistical purpose, includes Iran along with all eight members of the SAARC as part of Southern Asia.The boundaries of South Asia vary based on how the region is defined.
# SENT:  South Asia's northern, eastern, and western boundaries vary based on definitions used, while the Indian Ocean is the southern periphery.
# SENT:  Most of this region rests on the Indian Plate and is isolated from the rest of Asia by mountain barriers.
# SENT:  Much of the region consists of a peninsula in south-central Asia, rather resembling a diamond which is delineated by the Himalayas on the north, the Hindu Kush in the west, and the Arakanese in the east, and which extends southward into the Indian Ocean with the Arabian Sea to the southwest and the Bay of Bengal to the southeast.
# SENT:  The terms "Indian subcontinent" and "South Asia" are sometimes used interchangeably.
# SENT:  The Indian subcontinent is largely a geological term referring to the land mass that drifted northeastwards from ancient Gondwana, colliding with the Eurasian plate nearly 55 million years ago, towards the end of Palaeocene.
# SENT:  This geological region largely includes Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
# SENT:  Historians Catherine Asher and Cynthia Talbot state that the term "Indian subcontinent" describes a natural physical landmass in South Asia that has been relatively isolated from the rest of Eurasia.The use of the term Indian subcontinent began in the British Empire, and has been a term particularly common in its successors.
# SENT:  South Asia as the preferred term is particularly common when scholars or officials seek to differentiate this region from East Asia.
# SENT:  According to historians Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal, the Indian subcontinent has come to be known as South Asia "in more recent and neutral parlance."
# SENT:  This "neutral" notion refers to the concerns of Pakistan and Bangladesh, particularly given the recurring conflicts between India and Pakistan, wherein the dominant placement of "India" as a prefix before the subcontinent might offend some political sentiments.
# SENT:  However, in Pakistan, the term "South Asia" is considered too India-centric and was banned until 1989 after the death of Zia ul Haq.
# SENT:  This region has also been labelled as "India" (in its classical and pre-modern sense) and "Greater India".According to Robert M. Cutler – a scholar of Political Science at Carleton University, the terms South Asia, Southwest Asia, and Central Asia are distinct, but the confusion and disagreements have arisen due to the geopolitical movement to enlarge these regions into Greater South Asia, Greater Southwest Asia, and Greater Central Asia.
# SENT:  The frontier of Greater South Asia, states Cutler, between 2001 and 2006 has been geopolitically extended to eastern Iran and western Afghanistan in the west, and in the north to northeastern Iran, northern Afghanistan, and southern Uzbekistan.Identification with a South Asian identity was found to be significantly low among respondents in an older two-year survey across Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
# SENT:  The history of core South Asia begins with evidence of human activity of Homo sapiens, as long as 75,000 years ago, or with earlier hominids including Homo erectus from about 500,000 years ago.
# SENT:  The Indus Valley civilization, which spread and flourished in the northwestern part of South Asia from c. 3300 to 1300 BCE in present-day Pakistan, Northern India and Afghanistan, was the first major civilization in South Asia.
# SENT:  According to anthropologist Possehl, the Indus Valley civilization provides a logical, if somewhat arbitrary, starting point for South Asian religions, but these links from the Indus religion to later-day South Asian traditions are subject to scholarly dispute.
# SENT:  The Indo-Aryans were Indo-European pastoralists who migrated into north-western India after the collapse of the Indus Valley Civilization, Linguistic and archaeological data show a cultural change after 1500 BCE, with the linguistic and religious data clearly showing links with Indo-European languages and religion.
# SENT:  By about 1200 BCE, the Vedic culture and agrarian lifestyle was established in the northwest and northern Gangetic plain of South Asia.
# SENT:  The first recorded state-level society in South Asia existed around 1000 BCE.
# SENT:  These texts began to ask the meaning of a ritual, adding increasing levels of philosophical and metaphysical speculation, or "Hindu synthesis".Increasing urbanisation of India between 800 and 400 BCE, and possibly the spread of urban diseases, contributed to the rise of ascetic movements and of new ideas which challenged the orthodox Brahmanism.
# SENT:  These ideas led to Sramana movements, of which Mahavira (c. 549–477 BCE), proponent of Jainism, and Buddha (c. 563–483), founder of Buddhism, were the most prominent icons.The Greek army led by Alexander the Great stayed in the Hindu Kush region of South Asia for several years and then later moved into the Indus valley region.
# SENT:  Later, the Maurya Empire extended over much of South Asia in the 3rd century BCE.
# SENT:  Buddhism spread beyond south Asia, through northwest into Central Asia.
# SENT:  The Bamiyan Buddhas of Afghanistan and the edicts of Aśoka suggest that the Buddhist monks spread Buddhism (Dharma) in eastern provinces of the Seleucid Empire, and possibly even farther into Western Asia.
# SENT:  The Theravada school spread south from India in the 3rd century BCE, to Sri Lanka, later to Southeast Asia.
# SENT:  Classical Hindu and Sramanic (particularly Buddhist) ideas spread within South Asia, as well outside South Asia.
# SENT:  During this era, and through the 10th century, numerous cave monasteries and temples such as the Ajanta Caves, Badami cave temples and Ellora Caves were built in South Asia.
# SENT:  Islam came as a political power in the fringe of South Asia in 8th century CE when the Arab general Muhammad bin Qasim conquered Sindh, and Multan in Southern Punjab, in modern-day Pakistan.
# SENT:  By 962 CE, Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms in South Asia were under a wave of raids from Muslim armies from Central Asia.
# SENT:  Among them was Mahmud of Ghazni, who raided and plundered kingdoms in north India from east of the Indus river to west of Yamuna river seventeen times between 997 and 1030.
# SENT:  The wave of raids on north Indian and western Indian kingdoms by Muslim warlords continued after Mahmud of Ghazni, plundering and looting these kingdoms.
# SENT:  The Ghurid Sultan Mu'izz al-Din Muhammad began a systematic war of expansion into North India in 1173.
# SENT:  Some historians chronicle the Delhi Sultanate from 1192 due to the presence and geographical claims of Mu'izz al-Din in South Asia by that time.The Delhi Sultanate covered varying parts of South Asia and was ruled by a series of dynasties: Mamluk, Khalji, Tughlaq, Sayyid and Lodi dynasties.
# SENT:  Muhammad bin Tughlaq came to power in 1325, launched a war of expansion and the Delhi Sultanate reached it largest geographical reach over the South Asian region during his 26-year rule.
# SENT:  A Sunni Sultan, Muhammad bin Tughlaq persecuted non-Muslims such as Hindus, as well as non-Sunni Muslims such as Shia and Mahdi sects.Revolts against the Delhi Sultanate sprang up in many parts of South Asia during the 14th century.
# SENT:  In the South India, the Hindu Vijayanagara Empire came to power in 1336 and persisted throughout the 16th century.
# SENT:  The modern history period of South Asia, that is 16th-century onwards, witnessed the establishment of the Mughal empire, with Sunni Islam theology.
# SENT:  The first ruler was Babur had Turco-Mongol roots and his realm included the northwest and Indo-Gangetic Plain regions of South Asia.
# SENT:  The southern and northeastern regions of South Asia were largely under Hindu kings such as those of Vijayanagara Empire and Ahom kingdom, with some regions such as parts of modern Telangana and Andhra Pradesh under local Sultanates namely Deccan sultanates.The Mughal Empire continued its wars of expansion after Babur's death.
# SENT:  With the fall of the Rajput kingdoms and Vijayanagara, its boundaries encompassed almost the entirety of the Indian subcontinent.
# SENT:  The Mughal Empire was marked by a period of artistic exchanges and a Central Asian and South Asian architecture synthesis, with remarkable buildings such as the Taj Mahal.
# SENT:  Under Aurangzeb's rule, South Asia reached its zenith, becoming the world's largest economy and biggest manufacturing power.
# SENT:  After the death of Aurangzeb and the collapse of the Mughal Empire, which marks the beginning of modern India, in the early 18th century, it provided opportunities for the Marathas, Sikhs, Mysoreans and Nawabs of Bengal to exercise control over large regions of the Indian subcontinent.
# SENT:  By the mid-18th century, India was a major proto-industrializing region.Maritime trading between South Asia and European merchants began after the Portuguese explorer Vasco de Gama returned to Europe.
# SENT:  In 1905, the Government of India initiated the partition of Bengal, a decision which was eventually reversed after Indian opposition.
# SENT:  However, during the partition of India, Bengal was partitioned into East Bengal (Pakistan) and West Bengal (India).
# SENT:  It is surrounded by three water bodies – the Bay of Bengal, the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea – and has acutely varied climate zones.
# SENT:  The tip of the Indian Peninsula had the highest quality pearls.
# SENT:  Most of this region is resting on the Indian Plate, the northerly portion of the Indo-Australian Plate, separated from the rest of the Eurasian Plate.
# SENT:  The Indian Plate includes most of South Asia, forming a land mass which extends from the Himalayas into a portion of the basin under the Indian Ocean, including parts of South China and Eastern Indonesia, as well as Kunlun and Karakoram ranges, and extending up to but not including Ladakh, Kohistan, the Hindu Kush range, and Balochistan.
# SENT:  It may be noted that geophysically the Yarlung Tsangpo River in Tibet is situated at the outside of the border of the regional structure, while the Pamir Mountains in Tajikistan are situated inside that border.The Indian subcontinent formerly formed part of the supercontinent Gondwana, before rifting away during the Cretaceous period and colliding with the Eurasian Plate about 50–55 million years ago and giving birth to the Himalayan range and the Tibetan plateau.
# SENT:  It is the peninsular region south of the Himalayas and Kuen Lun mountain ranges and east of the Indus River and the Iranian Plateau, extending southward into the Indian Ocean between the Arabian Sea (to the southwest) and the Bay of Bengal (to the southeast).
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greater_India
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Indian_influence_on_Southeast_Asia
# SENT:  Southeast Asia was in the Indian sphere of cultural influence from 290 BCE to the 15th century CE, when Hindu-Buddhist influences were incorporated into local political systems.
# SENT:  Kingdoms in the southeast coast of the Indian Subcontinent had established trade, cultural and political relations with Southeast Asian kingdoms in Burma, Bhutan, Sri Lanka ,Thailand, Indonesia, Malay Peninsula, Philippines, Cambodia and Champa.
# SENT:  This led to the Indianisation and Sanskritisation of Southeast Asia within the Indosphere, Southeast Asian polities were the Indianised Hindu-Buddhist Mandala (polities, city states and confederacies).Indian culture itself arose from various distinct cultures and peoples, also including early Southeast Asian, specifically Austroasiatic influence onto early Indians.
# SENT:  A reason for the acceptance of Indian culture and religious traditions in Southeast Asia was because Indian culture already had similarities to indigenous cultures of Southeast Asia, which can be explained by earlier Southeast Asian (specifically Austroasiatic, such as early Munda and Mon Khmer groups), as well as later Himalayan (Tibetic) cultural and linguistic influence onto various Indian groups.
# SENT:  Several scholars, such as Professor Przyluski, Jules Bloch, and Lévi, among others, concluded that there is a significant cultural, linguistic, and political Mon-Khmer (Austroasiatic) influence on early Indian culture and traditions.
# SENT:  India is seen a melting pot of western, eastern and indigenous traditions.
# SENT:  This distinctly Indian cultural system was later adopted and assimilated into the indigenous social construct and statehood of Southeast Asian regional polity, which rulers gained power and stability, transforming small chieftains into regional powers.Unlike the other kingdoms which existed on the Indian subcontinent, the Pallava empire which ruled the southeastern coast of the Indian peninsula did not impose cultural restrictions on people who wished to cross the sea.
# SENT:  Whereas Buddhism thrived and became the main religion in many countries of Southeast Asia, it became a minority religion in India.
# SENT:  The influence of the civilization which existed on the Indian Subcontinent gradually became predominant among them, and it also became predominant among the peoples which lived on the Southeast Asian mainland.
# SENT:  Southern Indian traders, adventurers, teachers and priests continued to be the dominating influences in Southeast Asia until about 1500 CE.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:26, WORD1_SENTS:24, WORD2_SENTS:33
# WORDPAIR: Portugal Portuguese
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portugal
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Portuguese
# SENT:  European Portuguese (Portuguese: português europeu, pronounced [puɾtuˈɣez ewɾuˈpew]), also known as Portuguese of Portugal (Portuguese: português de Portugal), Iberian Portuguese (Portuguese: português ibérico), and Peninsular Portuguese (Portuguese: português peninsular), refers to the dialects of the Portuguese language spoken in Portugal.
# SENT:  The word "European" was chosen to avoid the clash of "Portuguese Portuguese" ("português português") as opposed to Brazilian Portuguese.
# SENT:  Portuguese is a pluricentric language; it is the same language with several interacting codified standard forms in many countries.
# SENT:  Portuguese is a Latin-based language with Celtic, Germanic, Greek, and Arabic influence.
# SENT:  It was spoken in the Iberian Peninsula before as Galician-Portuguese.
# SENT:  With the formation of Portugal as a country in the 12th century, the language evolved into Portuguese.
# SENT:  In the Spanish province of Galicia to the north of Portugal, the native language is Galician.
# SENT:  Both Portuguese and Galician are very similar and natives can understand each other as they share the same recent common ancestor.
# SENT:  Portuguese and Spanish are different languages, although they share 89% of their lexicon.
# SENT:  European Portuguese is notable among Romance languages in that it is stress-timed, rather than syllable-timed; in this respect it differs even from Brazilian Portuguese.
# SENT:  Portuguese uses vowel height to contrast stressed syllables with unstressed syllables; the vowels /a ɛ e ɔ o/ tend to be raised to [ɐ ɛ ɨ ɔ u] when they are unstressed (see below for details).
# SENT:  The dialects of Portugal are characterized by reducing vowels to a greater extent than others.
# SENT:  European Portuguese possesses quite a wide range of vowel allophones:
# SENT:  According to Mateus and d'Andrade (2000:19), in European Portuguese, the stressed [ɐ] only occurs in the following three contexts:
# SENT:  European Portuguese possesses a near-close near-back unrounded vowel.
# SENT:  The IPA Handbook transcribes it as /ɯ/, but in Portuguese studies /ɨ/ is traditionally used.
# SENT:  The Portuguese e caduc may be elided, becoming in some instances a syllabic consonant; e.g.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portuguese_language
# SENT:  Portuguese (português or, in full, língua portuguesa) is a western Romance language of the Indo-European language family, originating in the Iberian Peninsula of Europe.
# SENT:  It is an official language of Portugal, Brazil, Cape Verde, Angola, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau and São Tomé and Príncipe, while having co-official language status in East Timor, Equatorial Guinea, and Macau.
# SENT:  A Portuguese-speaking person or nation is referred to as "Lusophone" (lusófono).
# SENT:  As the result of expansion during colonial times, a cultural presence of Portuguese speakers is also found around the world.
# SENT:  Portuguese is part of the Ibero-Romance group that evolved from several dialects of Vulgar Latin in the medieval Kingdom of Galicia and the County of Portugal, and has kept some Celtic phonology in its lexicon.With approximately 250 million native speakers and 24 million L2 (second language) speakers, Portuguese has approximately 274 million total speakers.
# SENT:  Being the most widely spoken language in South America and all of the Southern Hemisphere, it is also the second-most spoken language, after Spanish, in Latin America, one of the 10 most spoken languages in Africa, and an official language of the European Union, Mercosur, the Organization of American States, the Economic Community of West African States, the African Union, and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, an international organization made up of all of the world's officially Lusophone nations.
# SENT:  In 1997, a comprehensive academic study ranked Portuguese as one of the 10 most influential languages in the world.
# SENT:  In Latin, the Portuguese language is known as lusitana or (latina) lusitanica, after the Lusitanians, a Celtic tribe that lived in the territory of present-day Portugal and Spain that adopted the Latin language as Roman settlers moved in.
# SENT:  Some Germanic words from that period are part of the Portuguese lexicon.
# SENT:  Like other Neo-Latin and European languages, Portuguese has adopted a significant number of loanwords from Greek, mainly in technical and scientific terminology.
# SENT:  Portuguese evolved from the medieval language, known today by linguists as Galician-Portuguese, Old Portuguese or Old Galician, of the northwestern medieval Kingdom of Galicia of which the County of Portugal was part.
# SENT:  It is in Latin administrative documents of the 9th century that written Galician-Portuguese words and phrases are first recorded.
# SENT:  This phase is known as Proto-Portuguese, which lasted from the 9th century until the 12th-century independence of the County of Portugal from the Kingdom of León, which had by then assumed reign over Galicia.
# SENT:  In the first part of the Galician-Portuguese period (from the 12th to the 14th century), the language was increasingly used for documents and other written forms.
# SENT:  The Occitan digraphs lh and nh, used in its classical orthography, were adopted by the orthography of Portuguese, presumably by Gerald of Braga, a monk from Moissac, who became bishop of Braga in Portugal in 1047, playing a major role in modernizing written Portuguese using classical Occitan norms.
# SENT:  Portugal became an independent kingdom in 1139, under King Afonso I of Portugal.
# SENT:  In 1290, King Denis of Portugal created the first Portuguese university in Lisbon (the Estudos Gerais, which later moved to Coimbra) and decreed for Portuguese, then simply called the "common language," to be known as the Portuguese language and used officially.
# SENT:  In the second period of Old Portuguese, in the 15th and 16th centuries, with the Portuguese discoveries, the language was taken to many regions of Africa, Asia, and the Americas.
# SENT:  By the mid-16th century, Portuguese had become a lingua franca in Asia and Africa, used not only for colonial administration and trade but also for communication between local officials and Europeans of all nationalities.
# SENT:  The Portuguese expanded across South America, across Africa to the Pacific Ocean, taking their language with them.
# SENT:  Its spread was helped by mixed marriages between Portuguese and local people and by its association with Roman Catholic missionary efforts, which led to the formation of creole languages such as that called Kristang in many parts of Asia (from the word cristão, "Christian").
# SENT:  Some Portuguese-speaking Christian communities in India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, and Indonesia preserved their language even after they were isolated from Portugal.
# SENT:  The end of the Old Portuguese period was marked by the publication of the Cancioneiro Geral by Garcia de Resende, in 1516.
# SENT:  The early times of Modern Portuguese, which spans the period from the 16th century to the present day, were characterized by an increase in the number of learned words borrowed from Classical Latin and Classical Greek because of the Renaissance (learned words borrowed from Latin also came from Renaissance Latin, the form of Latin during that time), which greatly enriched the lexicon.
# SENT:  Most literate Portuguese speakers were also literate in Latin; and thus they easily adopted Latin words into their writing, and eventually speech, in Portuguese.Spanish author Miguel de Cervantes once called Portuguese "the sweet and gracious language", while the Brazilian poet Olavo Bilac described it as a última flor do Lácio, inculta e bela ("the last flower of Latium, naïve and beautiful").
# SENT:  Portuguese is also termed "the language of Camões," after Luís Vaz de Camões, one of the greatest literary figures in the Portuguese language and author of the Portuguese epic poem The Lusiads.In March 2006, the Museum of the Portuguese Language, an interactive museum about the Portuguese language, was founded in São Paulo, Brazil, the city with the greatest number of Portuguese language speakers in the world.
# SENT:  Portuguese is the native language of the vast majority of the people in Portugal, Brazil and São Tomé and Príncipe (95%).
# SENT:  Perhaps 75% of the population of urban Angola speaks Portuguese natively, with approximately 85% fluent; these rates are lower in the countryside.
# SENT:  Just over 50% (and rapidly increasing) of the population of Mozambique are native speakers of Portuguese, and 70% are fluent, according to the 2007 census.
# SENT:  Portuguese is also spoken natively by 30% of the population in Guinea-Bissau, and a Portuguese-based creole is understood by all.
# SENT:  Almost 50% of the East Timorese are fluent in Portuguese.No data is available for Cape Verde, but almost all the population is bilingual, and the monolingual population speaks the Portuguese-based Cape Verdean Creole.
# SENT:  Portuguese is mentioned in the Constitution of South Africa as one of the languages spoken by communities within the country for which the Pan South African Language Board was charged with promoting and ensuring respect.There are also significant Portuguese-speaking immigrant communities in many countries including Andorra (17.1%), Bermuda, Canada (400,275 people in the 2006 census), France (1,625,000 people), Japan (400,000 people), Jersey, Luxembourg (about 25% of the population as of 2021), Namibia (about 4–5% of the population, mainly refugees from Angola in the north of the country), Paraguay (10.7% or 636,000 people), Switzerland (550,000 in 2019, learning + mother tongue), Venezuela (554,000).
# SENT:  and the United States (0.35% of the population or 1,228,126 speakers according to the 2007 American Community Survey).In some parts of former Portuguese India, namely Goa and Daman and Diu, the language is still spoken by about 10,000 people.
# SENT:  In 2014, an estimated 1,500 students were learning Portuguese in Goa.
# SENT:  Approximately 2% of the people of Macau, China are fluent speakers of Portuguese.
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portugal
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portuguese_Wikipedia
# SENT:  The Portuguese Wikipedia (Portuguese: Wikipédia em português) is the Portuguese language edition of Wikipedia (written Wikipédia, in Portuguese), the free encyclopedia.
# SENT:  In addition to being the sixth most accessed website in the world, Wikipedia is the fifteenth most accessed website in Brazil and the sixth most accessed in Portugal.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portuguese
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_of_Portugal
# SENT:  The languages of Portugal are Portuguese, Mirandese and Portuguese Sign Language.
# SENT:  Historically, Celtic and Lusitanian were spoken in what is now Portugal.
# SENT:  Portuguese is practically universal in Portugal, but there are some specificities.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Portugal
# SENT:  The history of Portugal can be traced from circa 400,000 years ago, when the region of present-day Portugal was inhabited by Homo heidelbergensis.
# SENT:  In 1095, Portugal broke away from the Kingdom of Galicia.
# SENT:  Afonso Henriques, son of the count Henry of Burgundy, proclaimed himself king of Portugal in 1139.
# SENT:  The Algarve (the southernmost province in Portugal) conquered from the Moors in 1249, and in 1255 Lisbon became the capital.
# SENT:  Portugal's land boundaries have remained almost unchanged since then.
# SENT:  From the late Middle Ages, in the 15th and 16th centuries, Portugal ascended to the status of a world power during Europe's "Age of Discovery" as it built up a vast empire.
# SENT:  This eventually led to a small interruption in Portugal's 800 year old independence by way of a 60-year dynastic union with Spain between 1580 and the beginning of the Portuguese Restoration War led by John IV in 1640.
# SENT:  Spain's disastrous defeat in its attempt to conquer England in 1588 by means of the Invincible Armada was also a factor, as Portugal had to contribute with ships for the invasion.
# SENT:  From the middle of the 19th century to the late 1950s, nearly two million Portuguese left Portugal to live in Brazil and the United States.In 1910, a revolution deposed the monarchy.
# SENT:  The new government instituted sweeping democratic reforms and granted independence to all of Portugal's African colonies in 1975.
# SENT:  Portugal is a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.
# SENT:  The word Portugal derives from the Roman-Celtic place name Portus Cale.
# SENT:  Cale or Cailleach was the name of a Celtic deity and the name of an early settlement located at the mouth of the Douro River (present-day Vila Nova de Gaia), which flows into the Atlantic Ocean in the north of what is now Portugal.
# SENT:  The name Portucale evolved into Portugale during the 7th and 8th centuries, and by the 9th century, that term was used extensively to refer to the region between the rivers Douro and Minho, the Minho flowing along what would become the northern Portugal–Spain border.
# SENT:  By the 11th and 12th centuries, Portugale was already referred to as Portugal.
# SENT:  The region of present-day Portugal has been inhabited by humans since circa 400,000 years ago, when Homo heidelbergensis entered the area.
# SENT:  The oldest human fossil found in Portugal is the 400,000-year-old Aroeira 3 H. Heidelbergensis skull discovered in the Cave of Aroeira in 2014.
# SENT:  Homo sapiens sapiens arrived in Portugal around 35,000 years ago and spread rapidly throughout the country.Pre-Celtic tribes inhabited Portugal leaving a remarkable cultural footprint.
# SENT:  The Cynetes developed a written language, leaving many stelae, which are mainly found in the south of Portugal.
# SENT:  Early in the first millennium BC, several waves of Celts invaded Portugal from Central Europe and intermarried with the local populations to form several different ethnic groups, with many tribes.
# SENT:  The Celtic presence in Portugal is traceable, in broad outline, through archaeological and linguistic evidence.
# SENT:  They dominated much of northern and central Portugal; but in the south, they were unable to establish their stronghold, which retained its non-Indo-European character until the Roman conquest.
# SENT:  In southern Portugal, some small, semi-permanent commercial coastal settlements were also founded by Phoenician-Carthaginians.
# SENT:  The Roman provinces that covered present-day Portugal were Lusitania in the south and Gallaecia in the north.
# SENT:  Numerous Roman sites are scattered around present-day Portugal.
# SENT:  The Romans sought to conquer Lusitania, a territory that included all of modern Portugal south of the Douro river and Spanish Extremadura, with its capital at Emerita Augusta (now Mérida).Mining was the primary factor that made the Romans interested in conquering the region: one of Rome's strategic objectives was to cut off Carthaginian access to the Iberian copper, tin, gold, and silver mines.
# SENT:  The Romans intensely exploited the Aljustrel (Vipasca) and Santo Domingo mines in the Iberian Pyrite Belt which extends to Seville.While the south of what is now Portugal was relatively easily occupied by the Romans, the conquest of the north was achieved only with difficulty due to resistance from Serra da Estrela by Celts and Lusitanians led by Viriatus, who managed to resist Roman expansion for years.
# SENT:  Nonetheless, he was responsible for raids into the more settled Romanized parts of Southern Portugal and Lusitania that involved the victimization of the inhabitants.The conquest of the Iberian Peninsula was complete two centuries after the Roman arrival, when they defeated the remaining Cantabri, Astures and Gallaeci in the Cantabrian Wars in the time of Emperor Augustus (19 BC).
# SENT:  In 212 AD, the Constitutio Antoniniana gave Roman citizenship to all free subjects of the empire and, at the end of the century, the emperor Diocletian founded the province of Gallaecia, which included modern-day northern Portugal, with its capital at Bracara Augusta (now Braga).
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:18, WORD1_SENTS:32, WORD2_SENTS:39
# WORDPAIR: Elephant Trumpet
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elephant_communication
# SENT:  Elephants communicate with each other in various ways, including touching, visual displays, vocalisations, seismic vibrations, and semiochemicals.
# SENT:  Elephants will try to appear more threatening by raising their heads and spreading their ears.
# SENT:  Elephants produce several sounds, usually through the larynx, though some may be modified by the trunk.
# SENT:  Trumpeting is made during excitement, distress or aggression.
# SENT:  Trumpets are longer squeaks with increased loudness and produced during extreme arousal.
# SENT:  Elephants can produce infrasonic calls which occur at frequencies less than 20 Hz.
# SENT:  Elephants are known to communicate with seismics, vibrations produced by impacts on the earth's surface or acoustical waves that travel through it.
# SENT:  Elephants possess several adaptations suited for seismic communication.
# SENT:  A unique sphincter-like muscle around the ear canal constricts the passageway, thereby dampening acoustic signals and allowing the animal to hear more seismic signals.Elephants appear to use seismics for a number of purposes.
# SENT:  Elephants can also communicate through olfaction and semiochemicals.
# SENT:  Elephants may investigate and detected semiochemicals through the vomeronasal organ (VNO).
# SENT:  Elephants may go through several steps of investigating the smell of a surface with their trunk before inserting its tip into their mouth to touch the anterior part of their hard palate and thus transfer semiochemicals to the VNO.
# SENT:  ElephantVoices
# PAGE:  https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/elephant-trunk
# PAGE:  https://twitter.com/hindumediawiki/status/1307694449212809216?lang=en
# PAGE:  https://www.wwf.org.uk/learn/fascinating-facts/elephants
# SENT:  Elephants are the largest existing land animals.
# SENT:  They are the only surviving members of the family Elephantidae and the order Proboscidea.
# SENT:  Elephants are scattered throughout sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Southeast Asia and are found in different habitats, including savannahs, forests, deserts, and marshes.
# SENT:  Elephants have a fission–fusion society, in which multiple family groups come together to socialise.
# SENT:  Elephants can live up to 70 years in the wild.
# SENT:  Elephant intelligence has been compared with that of primates and cetaceans.
# SENT:  Elephants are used as working animals in Asia.
# SENT:  Elephants are highly recognisable and have been featured in art, folklore, religion, literature, and popular culture.
# SENT:  Alongside their closest relatives belong to the family Elephantidae, the sole remaining family within the order Proboscidea.
# SENT:  Elephants and sirenians are further grouped in the clade Tethytheria.Three species of elephants are recognised; the African bush elephant (Loxodonta africana) and forest elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis) of sub-Saharan Africa, and the Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) of South and Southeast Asia.
# SENT:  Elephants retain certain features from their aquatic ancestry, such as their middle ear anatomy.Several species of proboscideans lived on islands and experienced insular dwarfism.
# SENT:  Elephants are the largest living terrestrial animals.
# SENT:  Elephants are considered dichromats and they can see well in dim light but not in bright light.
# SENT:  Elephant ears have thick bases with thin tips.
# SENT:  Elephants are capable of hearing at low frequencies and are most sensitive at 1 kHz (in close proximity to the Soprano C).
# SENT:  A unique proboscis nerve – formed by the maxillary and facial nerves – runs along both sides of the trunk.Elephant trunks have multiple functions, including breathing, olfaction, touching, grasping, and sound production.
# SENT:  Elephants are capable of dilating their nostrils at a radius of nearly 30%, increasing the nasal volume by 64%, and can inhale at over 150 m/s (490 ft/s) which is around 30 times the speed of a human sneeze.
# SENT:  Elephants can suck up food and water both to spray in the mouth and, in the case of the latter, to sprinkle on their bodies.
# SENT:  Elephants usually have 26 teeth: the incisors, known as the tusks, 12 deciduous premolars, and 12 molars.
# SENT:  Elephant teeth have loop-shaped dental ridges, which are thicker and more diamond-shaped in African elephants.
# SENT:  Elephants typically have grey skin, but African elephants look brown or reddish after wallowing in coloured mud.
# SENT:  Elephants have difficulty releasing heat through the skin because of their low surface-area-to-volume ratio, which is many times smaller than that of a human.
# SENT:  Elephants are incapable of rotating their front legs, as the ulna and radius are fixed in pronation; the "palm" of the manus faces backward.
# SENT:  As many as five toenails can be found on both the front and hind feet.Elephants can move both forwards and backwards, but cannot trot, jump, or gallop.
# SENT:  Elephants are capable swimmers.
# SENT:  Elephants inhale mostly through the trunk, although some air goes through the mouth.
# SENT:  Elephants have a unique organ, the temporal gland, located in both sides of the head.
# SENT:  Elephants are homeotherms, and maintain their average body temperature at ~ 36 °C, with minimum 35.2 °C during cool season, and maximum 38.0 °C during hot dry season.
# SENT:  Elephants are herbivorous and will eat leaves, twigs, fruit, bark, grass and roots.
# SENT:  Elephants tend to stay near water sources.
# SENT:  Elephants average 3–4 hours of sleep per day.
# SENT:  Elephants go on seasonal migrations in search of food, water, minerals, and mates.
# SENT:  Elephants are important seed dispersers; African forest elephants ingest and defecate seeds, with either no effect or a positive effect on germination.
# SENT:  Elephants can have a negative impact on ecosystems.
# SENT:  Elephants typically coexist peacefully with other herbivores, which will usually stay out of their way.
# SENT:  Elephants appear to distinguish between the growls of larger predators like tigers and smaller predators like leopards (which have not been recorded killing calves); they react to leopards less fearfully and more aggressively.
# SENT:  Elephants tend to have high numbers of parasites, particularly nematodes, compared to other herbivores.
# SENT:  Elephants are polygynous breeders, and copulations are most frequent during the peak of the wet season.
# SENT:  Elephant sperm must swim close to 2 m (6.6 ft) to reach the egg.
# PAGE:  https://www.elephantvoices.org/elephant-communication/acoustic-communication.html
# PAGE:  https://en.pons.com/translate/english-slovenian/trumpet
# SENT:  Trumpet-like instruments have historically been used as signaling devices in battle or hunting, with examples dating back to at least 1500 BC.
# SENT:  Trumpets are used in art music styles, for instance in orchestras, concert bands, and jazz ensembles, as well as in popular music.
# SENT:  Trumpets from the Oxus civilization (3rd millennium BC) of Central Asia have decorated swellings in the middle, yet are made out of one sheet of metal, which is considered a technical wonder for its time.The Shofar, made from a ram horn and the Hatzotzeroth, made of metal, are both mentioned in the Bible.
# SENT:  Trumpets can be constructed from other materials, including plastic.
# SENT:  Trumpets pitched in the key of low G are also called sopranos, or soprano bugles, after their adaptation from military bugles.
# SENT:  Glissando: Trumpeters can slide between notes by depressing the valves halfway and changing the lip tension.
# SENT:  Split tone: Trumpeters can produce more than one tone simultaneously by vibrating the two lips at different speeds.
# SENT:  One trumpet method is Jean-Baptiste Arban's Complete Conservatory Method for Trumpet (Cornet).
# SENT:  Merri Franquin wrote a Complete Method for Modern Trumpet, which fell into obscurity for much of the twentieth century until public endorsements by Maurice André revived interest in this work.
# SENT:  Joseph Haydn's Trumpet Concerto was written for him in 1796 and startled contemporary audiences by its novelty, a fact shown off by some stepwise melodies played low in the instrument's range.
# SENT:  Barclay, R. L. (1992).
# SENT:  Trumpet technique.
# SENT:  "Trumpet" .
# SENT:  International Trumpet Guild, international trumpet players' association with online library of scholarly journal back issues, news, jobs and other trumpet resources.
# SENT:  Trumpet Playing Articles by Jeff Purtle, protege of Claude Gordon
# SENT:  Trumpet Players' International Network is the oldest and largest email list with members from all parts of world.
# SENT:  60+ Trumpet and Teaching Videos Flash media TV of 60 trumpet and teaching videos by Clint Pops McLaughlin.
# PAGE:  https://eartrumpet.app/
# PAGE:  https://hal.science/hal-00486978v1
# PAGE:  https://www.theelephant.info/
# PAGE:  https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Elephants
# PAGE:  https://wiki.bedrock.dev/concepts/sounds
# PAGE:  https://www.civilbeat.org/2016/04/blood-ivory-2016-a-poem/
# PAGE:  https://time.com/6241419/babylon-true-story/
# PAGE:  https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q7378
# PAGE:  https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Adventist_Adventurer_Awards/Zoo_Animals
# PAGE:  https://deutschergrossspitz.de/geat-synonym.html
# PAGE:  https://www.openculture.com/2019/03/leonard-bernstein-awkwardly-turns-the-screws-on-tenor-jose-carreras-while-recording-west-side-story-1984.html
# WORDPAIR: Netherlands Dutch
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netherlands
# SENT:  The Netherlands (Dutch: Nederland [ˈneːdərlɑnt] (listen)), informally Holland, is a country located in Northwestern Europe with overseas territories in the Caribbean.
# SENT:  It is the largest of four constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
# SENT:  The Netherlands consists of twelve provinces; it borders Germany to the east, and Belgium to the south, with a North Sea coastline to the north and west.
# SENT:  The country's official language is Dutch, with West Frisian as a secondary official language in the province of Friesland.
# SENT:  Dutch, English and Papiamento are official in the Caribbean territories.The four largest cities in the Netherlands are Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht.
# SENT:  Schiphol is the busiest airport in the Netherlands, and the third busiest in Europe.
# SENT:  The Netherlands is a founding member of the European Union, Eurozone, G10, NATO, OECD, and WTO, as well as a part of the Schengen Area and the trilateral Benelux Union.
# SENT:  It hosts several intergovernmental organisations and international courts, many of which are centred in The Hague.Netherlands literally means "lower countries" in reference to its low elevation and flat topography, with nearly 26% falling below sea level.
# SENT:  In the Republican period, which began in 1588, the Netherlands entered a unique era of political, economic, and cultural greatness, ranked among the most powerful and influential in Europe and the world; this period is known as the Dutch Golden Age.
# SENT:  During this time, its trading companies, the Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company, established colonies and trading posts all over the world.With a population of 17.7 million people, all living within a total area of 41,850 km2 (16,160 sq mi)—of which the land area is 33,500 km2 (12,900 sq mi)—the Netherlands is the 16th most densely populated country in the world and the second-most densely populated country in the European Union, with a density of 520 people per square kilometre (1,300 people/sq mi).
# SENT:  Nevertheless, it is the world's second-largest exporter of food and agricultural products by value, owing to its fertile soil, mild climate, intensive agriculture, and inventiveness.The Netherlands has been a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with a unitary structure since 1848.
# SENT:  The Netherlands allowed women's suffrage in 1919 and was the first country to legalise same-sex marriage in 2001.
# SENT:  The Netherlands ranks among the highest in international indices of press freedom, economic freedom, human development and quality of life, as well as happiness.
# SENT:  The region called the Low Countries (comprising Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg) has the same toponymy.
# SENT:  In the case of the Low Countries and the Netherlands, the geographical location of the lower region has been more or less downstream and near the sea.
# SENT:  The Romans made a distinction between the Roman provinces of downstream Germania Inferior (nowadays part of Belgium and the Netherlands) and upstream Germania Superior.
# SENT:  This was translated as Neder-landen in contemporary Dutch official documents.
# SENT:  From the mid-sixteenth century, the "Low Countries" and the "Netherlands" lost their original deictic meaning.
# SENT:  In most Romance languages, the term "Low Countries" is officially used as the name for the Netherlands.
# SENT:  The Netherlands is informally referred to as Holland in various languages, including Dutch and English.
# SENT:  In other languages, Holland is the formal name for the Netherlands.
# SENT:  Holland can also refer to a region within the Netherlands that consists of North and South Holland.
# SENT:  The emphasis on Holland during the formation of the Dutch Republic, the Eighty Years' War, and the Anglo-Dutch Wars in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries, made Holland a pars pro toto for the entire country.Dutch is used as the adjective for the Netherlands, as in well as the demonym.
# SENT:  The origins of the word go back to Proto-Germanic *þiudiskaz, Latinised into Theodiscus, meaning "popular" or "of the people"; akin to Old Dutch Dietsch, Old High German duitsch, and Old English þeodisc, all meaning "(of) the common (Germanic) people".
# SENT:  At first, the English language used Dutch to refer to any or all speakers of West Germanic languages.
# SENT:  The prehistory of the area that is now the Netherlands was largely shaped by the sea and the rivers that constantly shifted the low-lying geography.
# SENT:  Some scholars have speculated that even a third ethnic identity and language, neither Germanic nor Celtic, survived in the Netherlands until the Roman period, the Iron Age Nordwestblock culture, that eventually was absorbed by the Celts to the south and the Germanic peoples from the east.
# SENT:  Caesar describes two main Celtic tribes living in what is now the southern Netherlands: the Menapii and the Eburones.
# SENT:  From their new base in West Flanders and the Southwest Netherlands, they were raiding the English Channel.
# SENT:  By the 490s, Clovis I had conquered and united all these territories in the southern Netherlands in one Frankish kingdom, and from there continued his conquests into Gaul.
# SENT:  the southern Netherlands and Flanders), who kept on speaking Old Frankish, which by the ninth century had evolved into Old Low Franconian or Old Dutch.
# SENT:  A Dutch-French language boundary hence came into existence.
# SENT:  Most of present-day Netherlands became part of Middle Francia, which was a weak kingdom and subject to numerous partitions and annexation attempts by its stronger neighbours.
# SENT:  As Frankish settlement progressed from Flanders and Brabant, the area quickly became Old Low Franconian (or Old Dutch).
# SENT:  In practice, this meant that Bruges and Antwerp became quasi-independent republics in their own right and would later develop into some of the most important cities and ports in Europe.Around 1100 AD, farmers from Flanders and Utrecht began draining and cultivating uninhabited swampy land in the western Netherlands, making the emergence of the County of Holland as the centre of power possible.
# SENT:  The title of Count of Holland was fought over in the Hook and Cod Wars (Dutch: Hoekse en Kabeljauwse twisten) between 1350 and 1490.
# SENT:  Most of the Imperial and French fiefs in what is now the Netherlands and Belgium were united in a personal union by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, in 1433.
# SENT:  Before the Burgundian union, the Dutch identified themselves by the town they lived in or their local duchy or county.
# SENT:  The new rulers defended Dutch trading interests, which then developed rapidly.
# SENT:  Land drainage had caused the peat of the former wetlands to reduce to a level that was too low for drainage to be maintained.Under Habsburg Charles V, ruler of the Holy Roman Empire and King of Spain, all fiefs in the current Netherlands region were united into the Seventeen Provinces, which also included most of present-day Belgium, Luxembourg, and some adjacent land in what is now France and Germany.
# SENT:  The level of ferocity exhibited by both sides can be gleaned from a Dutch chronicler's report:
# SENT:  The Duke of Alba ruthlessly attempted to suppress the Protestant movement in the Netherlands.
# SENT:  On 4 November 1576, Spanish tercios seized Antwerp and subjected it to the worst pillage in the Netherlands' history.
# SENT:  Following the sack of Antwerp, delegates from Catholic Brabant, Protestant Holland and Zeeland agreed, at Ghent, to join Utrecht and William the Silent in driving out all Spanish troops and forming a new government for the Netherlands.
# SENT:  As the fighting restarted, the Dutch began to look for help from the Protestant Elizabeth I of England, but she initially stood by her commitments to the Spanish in the Treaty of Bristol of 1574.
# SENT:  The Union of Utrecht is seen as the foundation of the modern Netherlands.Spanish troops sacked Maastricht in 1579, killing over 10,000 civilians and thereby ensuring the rebellion continued.
# SENT:  Against the rebels Philip could draw on the resources of the Spanish Empire, including in Iberia, Spanish America, Spanish Italy, and the Spanish Netherlands.
# SENT:  Queen Elizabeth I of England sympathised with the Dutch struggle against England's Spanish rival and sent an army of 7,600 soldiers to aid the Dutch in their war with the Catholic Spanish.
# SENT:  English forces under the Earl of Leicester and then Lord Willoughby faced the Spanish in the Netherlands under the Duke of Parma in a series of largely indecisive actions that tied down significant numbers of Spanish troops and bought time for the Dutch to reorganise their defences.
# SENT:  After declaring their independence, the provinces of Holland, Zeeland, Groningen, Friesland, Utrecht, Overijssel, and Gelderland formed a confederation.
# SENT:  Their population was mainly Roman Catholic, and these areas did not have a governmental structure of their own and were used as a buffer zone between the Republic and the Spanish-controlled Southern Netherlands.
# SENT:  In the Dutch Golden Age, spanning much of the 17th century, the Dutch Empire grew to become one of the major seafaring and economic powers, alongside Portugal, Spain, France and England.
# SENT:  By 1650, the Dutch owned 16,000 merchant ships.
# SENT:  The Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company established colonies and trading posts all over the world, including ruling the western parts of Taiwan between 1624–1662 and 1664–1667.
# SENT:  The Dutch settlement in North America began with the founding of New Amsterdam on the southern part of Manhattan in 1614.
# SENT:  In South Africa, the Dutch settled the Cape Colony in 1652.
# SENT:  Dutch colonies in South America were established along the many rivers in the fertile Guyana plains, among them Colony of Surinam (now Suriname).
# SENT:  In Asia, the Dutch established the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia), and the only western trading post in Japan, Dejima.During the period of Proto-industrialisation, the empire received 50% of textiles and 80% of silks import from the India's Mughal Empire, chiefly from its most developed region known as Bengal Subah.Many economic historians regard the Netherlands as the first thoroughly capitalist country in the world.
# SENT:  In 1672 – known in Dutch history as the Rampjaar (Disaster Year) – the Dutch Republic was at war with France, England and three German Bishoprics simultaneously.
# SENT:  It managed to turn the tide by inundating parts of Holland but could never recover to its former glory again and went into a state of a general decline in the 18th century, with economic competition from England and long-standing rivalries between the two main factions in Dutch society, the republican Staatsgezinden and the supporters of the stadtholder the Prinsgezinden as main political factions.
# SENT:  With the armed support of revolutionary France, Dutch republicans proclaimed the Batavian Republic, modelled after the French Republic and rendering the Netherlands a unitary state on 19 January 1795.
# SENT:  But from 1806 to 1810, the Kingdom of Holland was set up by Napoleon Bonaparte as a puppet kingdom governed by his brother Louis Bonaparte to control the Netherlands more effectively.
# SENT:  However, King Louis Bonaparte tried to serve Dutch interests instead of his brother's, and he was forced to abdicate on 1 July 1810.
# SENT:  The Emperor sent in an army and the Netherlands became part of the French Empire until the autumn of 1813 when Napoleon was defeated in the Battle of Leipzig.
# SENT:  William Frederick, son of the last stadtholder, returned to the Netherlands in 1813 and proclaimed himself Sovereign Prince of the Netherlands.
# SENT:  Two years later, the Congress of Vienna added the southern Netherlands to the north to create a strong country on the northern border of France.
# SENT:  William Frederick raised this United Netherlands to the status of a kingdom and proclaimed himself as King William I in 1815.
# SENT:  However, the Southern Netherlands had been culturally separate from the north since 1581, and rebelled.
# SENT:  The south gained independence in 1830 as Belgium (recognised by the Northern Netherlands in 1839 as the Kingdom of the Netherlands was created by decree), while the personal union between Luxembourg and the Netherlands was severed in 1890, when William III died with no surviving male heirs.
# SENT:  Ascendancy laws prevented his daughter Queen Wilhelmina from becoming the next Grand Duchess.The Belgian Revolution at home and the Java War in the Dutch East Indies brought the Netherlands to the brink of bankruptcy.
# SENT:  However, the Cultivation System was introduced in 1830; in the Dutch East Indies, 20% of village land had to be devoted to government crops for export.
# SENT:  The policy brought the Dutch enormous wealth and made the colony self-sufficient.The Netherlands abolished slavery in its colonies in 1863.
# SENT:  The Netherlands was able to remain neutral during World War I, in part because the import of goods through the Netherlands proved essential to German survival until the blockade by the British Royal Navy in 1916.
# SENT:  The Rotterdam Blitz forced the main element of the Dutch army to surrender four days later.
# SENT:  During the occupation, over 100,000 Dutch Jews were rounded up and transported to Nazi extermination camps; only a few of them survived.
# SENT:  Dutch workers were conscripted for forced labour in Germany, civilians who resisted were killed in reprisal for attacks on German soldiers, and the countryside was plundered for food.
# SENT:  Although there were thousands of Dutch who risked their lives by hiding Jews from the Germans, over 20,000 Dutch fascists joined the Waffen SS, fighting on the Eastern Front.
# SENT:  On 8 December 1941, the Dutch government-in-exile in London declared war on Japan, but could not prevent the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies (Indonesia).
# SENT:  Soon after VE Day, the Dutch fought a colonial war against the new Republic of Indonesia.
# SENT:  The Dutch colonies of Surinam and Curaçao and Dependencies and the European country all became countries within the Kingdom, on a basis of equality.
# SENT:  In 1993, the former two of these were incorporated into the European Union.Government-encouraged emigration efforts to reduce population density prompted some 500,000 Dutch people to leave the country after the war.
# SENT:  In the past, these rivers functioned as a natural barrier between fiefdoms and hence historically created a cultural divide, as is evident in some phonetic traits that are recognisable on either side of what the Dutch call their "Great Rivers" (de Grote Rivieren).
# SENT:  Just like the previous, this river forms a linguistic divide: people to the northeast of this river speak Dutch Low Saxon dialects (except for the province of Friesland, which has its own language).
# SENT:  Over the centuries, the Dutch coastline has changed considerably as a result of natural disasters and human intervention.
# SENT:  The Dutch government subsequently instituted a large-scale programme, the "Delta Works", to protect the country against future flooding, which was completed over a period of more than thirty years.
# SENT:  Even in flooded areas, peat extraction continued through turf dredging.Because of the flooding, farming was difficult, which encouraged foreign trade, the result of which was that the Dutch were involved in world affairs since the early 14th/15th century.
# SENT:  After the 1953 disaster, the Delta Works was constructed, which is a comprehensive set of civil works throughout the Dutch coast.
# SENT:  Although in the English language they are considered part of the Leeward Islands, French, Spanish, Dutch and the English spoken locally consider them part of the Windward Islands.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:12, WORD1_SENTS:38, WORD2_SENTS:38
# WORDPAIR: Netherlands Europe
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netherlands
# SENT:  The Netherlands (Dutch: Nederland [ˈneːdərlɑnt] (listen)), informally Holland, is a country located in Northwestern Europe with overseas territories in the Caribbean.
# SENT:  It is the largest of four constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
# SENT:  The Netherlands consists of twelve provinces; it borders Germany to the east, and Belgium to the south, with a North Sea coastline to the north and west.
# SENT:  Dutch, English and Papiamento are official in the Caribbean territories.The four largest cities in the Netherlands are Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht.
# SENT:  The Port of Rotterdam is the busiest seaport in Europe.
# SENT:  Schiphol is the busiest airport in the Netherlands, and the third busiest in Europe.
# SENT:  The Netherlands is a founding member of the European Union, Eurozone, G10, NATO, OECD, and WTO, as well as a part of the Schengen Area and the trilateral Benelux Union.
# SENT:  It hosts several intergovernmental organisations and international courts, many of which are centred in The Hague.Netherlands literally means "lower countries" in reference to its low elevation and flat topography, with nearly 26% falling below sea level.
# SENT:  In the Republican period, which began in 1588, the Netherlands entered a unique era of political, economic, and cultural greatness, ranked among the most powerful and influential in Europe and the world; this period is known as the Dutch Golden Age.
# SENT:  During this time, its trading companies, the Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company, established colonies and trading posts all over the world.With a population of 17.7 million people, all living within a total area of 41,850 km2 (16,160 sq mi)—of which the land area is 33,500 km2 (12,900 sq mi)—the Netherlands is the 16th most densely populated country in the world and the second-most densely populated country in the European Union, with a density of 520 people per square kilometre (1,300 people/sq mi).
# SENT:  Nevertheless, it is the world's second-largest exporter of food and agricultural products by value, owing to its fertile soil, mild climate, intensive agriculture, and inventiveness.The Netherlands has been a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with a unitary structure since 1848.
# SENT:  The Netherlands allowed women's suffrage in 1919 and was the first country to legalise same-sex marriage in 2001.
# SENT:  The Netherlands ranks among the highest in international indices of press freedom, economic freedom, human development and quality of life, as well as happiness.
# SENT:  The region called the Low Countries (comprising Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg) has the same toponymy.
# SENT:  Place names with Neder, Nieder, Nedre, Nether, Lage(r) or Low(er) (in Germanic languages) and Bas or Inferior (in Romance languages) are in use in low-lying places all over Europe.
# SENT:  In the case of the Low Countries and the Netherlands, the geographical location of the lower region has been more or less downstream and near the sea.
# SENT:  The Romans made a distinction between the Roman provinces of downstream Germania Inferior (nowadays part of Belgium and the Netherlands) and upstream Germania Superior.
# SENT:  From the mid-sixteenth century, the "Low Countries" and the "Netherlands" lost their original deictic meaning.
# SENT:  In most Romance languages, the term "Low Countries" is officially used as the name for the Netherlands.
# SENT:  The Netherlands is informally referred to as Holland in various languages, including Dutch and English.
# SENT:  In other languages, Holland is the formal name for the Netherlands.
# SENT:  Holland can also refer to a region within the Netherlands that consists of North and South Holland.
# SENT:  The emphasis on Holland during the formation of the Dutch Republic, the Eighty Years' War, and the Anglo-Dutch Wars in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries, made Holland a pars pro toto for the entire country.Dutch is used as the adjective for the Netherlands, as in well as the demonym.
# SENT:  The prehistory of the area that is now the Netherlands was largely shaped by the sea and the rivers that constantly shifted the low-lying geography.
# SENT:  There was a quick and smooth transition from the Funnelbeaker farming culture to the pan-European Corded Ware pastoralist culture (c. 2950 BC).
# SENT:  The King's grave of Oss (700 BC) was found in a burial mound, the largest of its kind in Western Europe and containing an iron sword with an inlay of gold and coral.
# SENT:  Some scholars have speculated that even a third ethnic identity and language, neither Germanic nor Celtic, survived in the Netherlands until the Roman period, the Iron Age Nordwestblock culture, that eventually was absorbed by the Celts to the south and the Germanic peoples from the east.
# SENT:  Caesar describes two main Celtic tribes living in what is now the southern Netherlands: the Menapii and the Eburones.
# SENT:  From their new base in West Flanders and the Southwest Netherlands, they were raiding the English Channel.
# SENT:  By the 490s, Clovis I had conquered and united all these territories in the southern Netherlands in one Frankish kingdom, and from there continued his conquests into Gaul.
# SENT:  the southern Netherlands and Flanders), who kept on speaking Old Frankish, which by the ninth century had evolved into Old Low Franconian or Old Dutch.
# SENT:  Frisian was spoken along the entire southern North Sea coast, and it is still the language most closely related to English among the living languages of continental Europe.
# SENT:  The Frankish Carolingian empire modelled itself on the Roman Empire and controlled much of Western Europe.
# SENT:  Most of present-day Netherlands became part of Middle Francia, which was a weak kingdom and subject to numerous partitions and annexation attempts by its stronger neighbours.
# SENT:  In practice, this meant that Bruges and Antwerp became quasi-independent republics in their own right and would later develop into some of the most important cities and ports in Europe.Around 1100 AD, farmers from Flanders and Utrecht began draining and cultivating uninhabited swampy land in the western Netherlands, making the emergence of the County of Holland as the centre of power possible.
# SENT:  Most of the Imperial and French fiefs in what is now the Netherlands and Belgium were united in a personal union by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, in 1433.
# SENT:  Amsterdam grew and in the 15th century became the primary trading port in Europe for grain from the Baltic region.
# SENT:  Land drainage had caused the peat of the former wetlands to reduce to a level that was too low for drainage to be maintained.Under Habsburg Charles V, ruler of the Holy Roman Empire and King of Spain, all fiefs in the current Netherlands region were united into the Seventeen Provinces, which also included most of present-day Belgium, Luxembourg, and some adjacent land in what is now France and Germany.
# SENT:  The Duke of Alba ruthlessly attempted to suppress the Protestant movement in the Netherlands.
# SENT:  On 4 November 1576, Spanish tercios seized Antwerp and subjected it to the worst pillage in the Netherlands' history.
# SENT:  Following the sack of Antwerp, delegates from Catholic Brabant, Protestant Holland and Zeeland agreed, at Ghent, to join Utrecht and William the Silent in driving out all Spanish troops and forming a new government for the Netherlands.
# SENT:  The Union of Utrecht is seen as the foundation of the modern Netherlands.Spanish troops sacked Maastricht in 1579, killing over 10,000 civilians and thereby ensuring the rebellion continued.
# SENT:  Against the rebels Philip could draw on the resources of the Spanish Empire, including in Iberia, Spanish America, Spanish Italy, and the Spanish Netherlands.
# SENT:  English forces under the Earl of Leicester and then Lord Willoughby faced the Spanish in the Netherlands under the Duke of Parma in a series of largely indecisive actions that tied down significant numbers of Spanish troops and bought time for the Dutch to reorganise their defences.
# SENT:  Their population was mainly Roman Catholic, and these areas did not have a governmental structure of their own and were used as a buffer zone between the Republic and the Spanish-controlled Southern Netherlands.
# SENT:  In Asia, the Dutch established the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia), and the only western trading post in Japan, Dejima.During the period of Proto-industrialisation, the empire received 50% of textiles and 80% of silks import from the India's Mughal Empire, chiefly from its most developed region known as Bengal Subah.Many economic historians regard the Netherlands as the first thoroughly capitalist country in the world.
# SENT:  In early modern Europe, it had the wealthiest trading city (Amsterdam) and the first full-time stock exchange.
# SENT:  With the armed support of revolutionary France, Dutch republicans proclaimed the Batavian Republic, modelled after the French Republic and rendering the Netherlands a unitary state on 19 January 1795.
# SENT:  But from 1806 to 1810, the Kingdom of Holland was set up by Napoleon Bonaparte as a puppet kingdom governed by his brother Louis Bonaparte to control the Netherlands more effectively.
# SENT:  The Emperor sent in an army and the Netherlands became part of the French Empire until the autumn of 1813 when Napoleon was defeated in the Battle of Leipzig.
# SENT:  William Frederick, son of the last stadtholder, returned to the Netherlands in 1813 and proclaimed himself Sovereign Prince of the Netherlands.
# SENT:  Two years later, the Congress of Vienna added the southern Netherlands to the north to create a strong country on the northern border of France.
# SENT:  William Frederick raised this United Netherlands to the status of a kingdom and proclaimed himself as King William I in 1815.
# SENT:  However, the Southern Netherlands had been culturally separate from the north since 1581, and rebelled.
# SENT:  The south gained independence in 1830 as Belgium (recognised by the Northern Netherlands in 1839 as the Kingdom of the Netherlands was created by decree), while the personal union between Luxembourg and the Netherlands was severed in 1890, when William III died with no surviving male heirs.
# SENT:  Ascendancy laws prevented his daughter Queen Wilhelmina from becoming the next Grand Duchess.The Belgian Revolution at home and the Java War in the Dutch East Indies brought the Netherlands to the brink of bankruptcy.
# SENT:  The policy brought the Dutch enormous wealth and made the colony self-sufficient.The Netherlands abolished slavery in its colonies in 1863.
# SENT:  The Netherlands was able to remain neutral during World War I, in part because the import of goods through the Netherlands proved essential to German survival until the blockade by the British Royal Navy in 1916.
# SENT:  The Dutch colonies of Surinam and Curaçao and Dependencies and the European country all became countries within the Kingdom, on a basis of equality.
# SENT:  In the 1950's, the Netherlands became one of the six founding countries of the European Communities, following the 1952 establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community, and subsequent 1958 creations of the European Economic Community and European Atomic Energy Community.
# SENT:  In 1993, the former two of these were incorporated into the European Union.Government-encouraged emigration efforts to reduce population density prompted some 500,000 Dutch people to leave the country after the war.
# SENT:  The European Netherlands has a total area of 41,543 km2 (16,040 sq mi), including water bodies; and a land area of 33,481 km2 (12,927 sq mi).
# SENT:  The European part of the country is for the most part flat, with the exception of foothills in the far southeast, up to a height of no more than 321 metres, and some low hill ranges in the central parts.
# SENT:  Nearly 17% of the country's land area is reclaimed from the sea and from lakes.Much of the country was originally formed by the estuaries of three large European rivers: the Rhine (Rijn), the Meuse (Maas) and the Scheldt (Schelde), as well as their tributaries.
# SENT:  The south-western part of the Netherlands is to this day a river delta of these three rivers, the Rhine-Meuse-Scheldt delta.The European Netherlands is divided into north and south parts by the Rhine, the Waal, its main tributary branch, and the Meuse.
# SENT:  Other activities include sailing, fishing, cycling, and bird watching.Phytogeographically, the European Netherlands is shared between the Atlantic European and Central European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom.
# SENT:  According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, the European territory of the Netherlands belongs to the ecoregion of Atlantic mixed forests.
# SENT:  The Dutch economy is very open and relies strongly on international trade.The foreign policy of the Netherlands is based on four basic commitments: to Atlantic co-operation, to European integration, to international development and to international law.
# SENT:  The Netherlands has one of the oldest standing armies in Europe; it was first established as such by Maurice of Nassau in the late 1500s.
# SENT:  After 1830, it was deployed mainly in the Dutch colonies, as the Netherlands remained neutral in European wars (including the First World War), until the Netherlands was invaded in World War II and defeated by the Wehrmacht in May 1940.
# SENT:  The Dutch military was therefore part of the NATO strength in Cold War Europe, deploying its army to several bases in Germany.
# SENT:  The Netherlands has a developed economy and has been playing a special role in the European economy for many centuries.
# SENT:  The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (AEX), part of Euronext, is the world's oldest stock exchange and is one of Europe's largest bourses.
# SENT:  The Dutch location gives it prime access to markets in the UK and Germany, with the Port of Rotterdam being the largest port in Europe.
# SENT:  The Netherlands successfully addressed the issue of public finances and stagnating job growth long before its European partners.
# SENT:  Amsterdam is the 5th-busiest tourist destination in Europe with more than 4.2 million international visitors.
# SENT:  Since the enlargement of the EU large numbers of migrant workers have arrived in the Netherlands from Central and Eastern Europe.The Netherlands continues to be one of the leading European nations for attracting foreign direct investment and is one of the five largest investors in the United States.
# SENT:  As of 2018, the Netherlands had one of the highest rates of carbon dioxide emissions per person in the European Union.
# SENT:  The Dutch rank first in the European Union and second worldwide in value of agricultural exports, behind only the United States, with agricultural exports earning €80.7 billion in 2014, up from €75.4 billion in 2012.
# SENT:  It is the 5th most densely populated country in Europe, and except for Malta and very small city-states like Monaco, Vatican City and San Marino, it is the most densely populated country in Europe.
# SENT:  The fertility rate in the Netherlands is 1.78 children per woman (2018 estimate), which is high compared with many other European countries, but below the rate of 2.1 children per woman required for natural population replacement, it remains considerably below the high of 5.39 children born per woman in 1879.
# SENT:  In 2022, the population was 74.8% ethnically Dutch, 8.3% other European, 2.4% Turkish, 2.4% Moroccan, 2.0% Indonesian, 2.0% Surinamese, and 8.1% others.
# SENT:  The Randstad has a population of about 8.2 million inhabitants and is the 5th largest metropolitan area in Europe.
# SENT:  Four other languages are protected under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
# SENT:  Dutch universities have a tuition fee of about 2,000 euros a year for students from the Netherlands and the European Union.
# SENT:  In 2016, the Netherlands maintained its number one position at the top of the annual Euro health consumer index (EHCI), which compares healthcare systems in Europe, scoring 916 of a maximum 1,000 points.
# SENT:  On 48 indicators such as patient rights and information, accessibility, prevention and outcomes, the Netherlands secured its top position among 37 European countries for six years in a row.
# SENT:  In contrast to many other European systems, the Dutch government is responsible for the accessibility and quality of the healthcare system in the Netherlands, but not in charge of its management.Healthcare in the Netherlands can be divided in several ways: three echelons, in somatic and mental health care and in 'cure' (short term) and 'care' (long term).
# SENT:  As of 2019, the Netherlands hosts approximately 30% of all recharging stations in the European Union.
# SENT:  Like in many other European countries, the Dutch rail network of 3,013 km route is also rather dense.
# SENT:  In 2013, the European Cyclists' Federation ranked both the Netherlands and Denmark as the most bike-friendly countries in Europe, but more of the Dutch (36%) than of the Danes (23%) list the bike as their most frequent mode of transport on a typical day.
# SENT:  The Port of Rotterdam is the largest port in Europe and the largest port in the world outside East-Asia, with the rivers Meuse and Rhine providing excellent access to the hinterland upstream reaching to Basel, Switzerland, and into Germany and France.
# SENT:  The harbour functions as an important transit point for bulk materials and between the European continent and overseas.
# SENT:  The Netherlands also hosts Europe's 4th largest port in Amsterdam.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:26, WORD1_SENTS:44, WORD2_SENTS:24
# WORDPAIR: Japan Yen
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_yen
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_currency
# SENT:  Japanese currency has a history covering the period from the 8th century AD to the present.
# SENT:  After the traditional usage of rice as a currency medium, Japan adopted currency systems and designs from China before developing a separate system of its own.
# SENT:  Before the 7th-8th centuries AD, Japan used commodity money for trading.
# SENT:  The main items of commodity money in Japan were arrowheads, rice grains and gold powder.
# SENT:  Since then however, the shell has become a symbol for money in many Chinese and Japanese ideograms.
# SENT:  The earliest coins to reach Japan were Chinese Ban Liang and Wu Zhu coins, as well as the coins produced by Wang Mang during the first centuries of the first millennium AD; these coins have been excavated all over Japan, but as Japan's economy was not sufficiently developed at the time, these coins were more likely to be used as precious objects rather than a means of exchange; rice and cloth served as the main currencies of Japan at the time.The first coins produced in Japan are called the Mumonginsen (無文銀銭, or 'silver coins without inscription') and the copper alloy Fuhonsen (富本銭, coins made from an alloy of copper, lead and tin) which were all introduced in the late seventh century.
# SENT:  In modern times the usage of Fuhonsen has often been interpreted as charms rather than currency, but it has recently been discovered that these copper coins were in fact the first government-made coinage of Japan.
# SENT:  Japan's first formal currency system was the Kōchōsen (Japanese: 皇朝銭, "Imperial currency").
# SENT:  It was exemplified by the adoption of Japan's first official coin type, the Wadōkaichin.
# SENT:  It was first minted in 708 AD on the orders of Empress Genmei, Japan's 43rd Imperial ruler.
# SENT:  "Wadō Kaichin" is the reading of the four characters printed on the coin, and is thought to be composed of the era name Wadō (和銅, "Japanese copper"), which could alternatively mean "happiness", and "Kaichin", thought to be related to "currency".This coinage was inspired by the Tang coinage (唐銭) named Kaigen Tsūhō (Chinese: 開元通宝, Kai Yuan Tong Bao), first minted in Chang'an in 621 CE.
# SENT:  Japan's contacts with the Chinese mainland became intense during the Tang period, with many exchanges and cultural imports occurring.
# SENT:  The first Japanese embassy to China is recorded to have been sent in 630.
# SENT:  The importance of metallic currency appeared to Japanese nobles, probably leading to some coin minting at the end of the 7th century, such as the Fuhonsen coinage (富本銭), discovered in 1998 through archaeological research in Nara Prefecture.
# SENT:  The Kōchōsen Japanese system of coinage became strongly debased, with its metallic content and value decreasing.
# SENT:  From the 12th century, the expansion of trade and barter again highlighted the need for a currency.
# SENT:  Chinese coinage came to be used as the standard currency of Japan, for a period lasting from the 12th to the 17th century.
# SENT:  Coins were also imported from Annam (modern Vietnam) and Korea.There is evidence to suggest that the Yuan dynasty used to extensively export Chinese cash coins to Japan for local circulation.
# SENT:  As the Chinese coins were not in sufficient number as trade and economy expanded, local Japanese imitations of Chinese coins were made from the 14th century, especially imitations of Ming coins, with inscribed names identical to those of contemporary Chinese coins.
# SENT:  Especially the Takeda clan of Kōshū minted gold coins which were later adopted by the Tokugawa shogunate.Hideyoshi unified Japan, and thus centralized most of the minting of large denomination silver and gold coins, effectively putting in place the basis of a unified currency system.
# SENT:  Tokugawa coinage was a unitary and independent metallic monetary system established by shōgun Tokugawa Ieyasu in 1601 in Japan, and which lasted throughout the Tokugawa period until its end in 1867.From 1601, Tokugawa coinage consisted of gold, silver, and bronze denominations.
# SENT:  The material for the coinage came from gold and silver mines across Japan.
# SENT:  Regarding diamond coins, the Kan'ei Tsūhō coin (寛永通宝) came to replace the Chinese coins that had been in circulation in Japan, as well as those that were privately minted, and became the legal tender for small denominations.Yamada Hagaki, Japan's first notes, were issued around 1600 by Shinto priests also working as merchants in the Ise-Yamada (modern Mie Prefecture), in exchange for silver.
# SENT:  Japan thus combined gold, silver, and copper standards with the circulation of paper money.Tokugawa coinage remained in use during the Sakoku period of seclusion, although it was progressively debased to try to manage government deficits.
# SENT:  The Tokugawa coinage collapsed following the reopening of Japan to the West in 1854, as the silver-gold exchange rates gave foreigners huge opportunities for arbitrage, leading to the export of large quantities of gold.
# SENT:  Gold traded for silver in Japan at a 1:5 ratio, while that ratio was 1:15 abroad.
# SENT:  During the Bakumatsu period in 1859 Mexican dollars were even given official currency in Japan, by coining them with marks in Japanese and officializing their exchange rate of three "Bu".
# SENT:  Following 1868, a new currency system based on the Japanese yen was progressively established along Western lines, which has remained Japan's currency system to this day.
# SENT:  Through the New Currency Act of 1871, Japan adopted the gold standard along international lines, with 1 yen corresponding to 1.5g of pure gold.
# SENT:  During the Seinan Civil War, an original type of paper money was issued by the rebel leader Saigō Takamori in order to finance his war effort.In 1881, the first Japanese note to feature a portrait, the Empress Jingū note (神功皇后札), was issued.
# SENT:  In order to regularize the issuance of convertible banknotes, a central bank, the Bank of Japan, was established in 1882.
# SENT:  The first central banknotes were issued by the Bank of Japan in 1885.
# SENT:  Following the devaluation of silver, and the abandonment of silver as a currency standard by Western powers, Japan adopted the gold standard through the Coinage Law of 1897.
# SENT:  In 1899, the National Banks banknotes were declared invalid, leaving the Bank of Japan as the only supplier of currency.
# SENT:  During World War I, Japan prohibited the export of gold in 1917, as did many countries such as the United States.
# SENT:  Conversion of banknotes into gold was suspended.From 1941, Japan formally adopted a managed currency system, and in 1942 the Bank of Japan Law officially suppressed the obligation of conversion.
# SENT:  In 1946, following the Second World War, Japan removed the old currency (旧円券) and introduced the "New Yen" (新円券).
# SENT:  Since then, together with the economic expansion of Japan, the yen has become one of the major currencies of the world.
# SENT:  Lever of empire: the international gold standard and the crisis of liberalism in prewar Japan.
# SENT:  17 of Twentieth Century Japan: The Emergence of a World Power.
# SENT:  ISBN 0-520-24420-6.Early Japanese Coins.
# SENT:  Timeline of Japanese coins by the government-owned Japan Mint
# PAGE:  https://hif.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_yen
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banknotes_of_the_Japanese_yen
# SENT:  The banknotes of the Japanese yen are part of the physical form of Japan's currency.
# SENT:  Modern banknotes were first released by the Bank of Japan in 1885, three years after the Japanese government established a centralized bank.
# SENT:  Currently, portraits of people from the Meiji period and later are printed on Japanese banknotes.
# SENT:  Many Japanese consider the 2000 yen note a novelty as it is the only Japanese denomination whose first digit is 2.
# SENT:  List of banknotes valid in Japan
# SENT:  Currency Museum of the Bank of Japan
# SENT:  Museum of Bank notes and Coins (in Japanese)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Japanese_yen
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yen
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yen_(disambiguation)
# PAGE:  https://so.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yen
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1_yen_coin
# SENT:  The one sen coin (一銭) was a Japanese coin worth one-hundredth of a Japanese yen, as 100 sen equalled 1 yen.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Currencies_of_Japan
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/10_yen_coin
# SENT:  The obverse of the coin depicts the Phoenix Hall of Byōdō-in, a Buddhist temple in Uji, Kyoto prefecture, with the kanji for "Japan" and "Ten Yen".
# SENT:  The Japanese government held a series of auctions from 2005 through 2007 which included previously unreported rare coins in denominations of 5, 10 and 20 Yen.Modern ten yen coins date back to 1951 (year 26 of Shōwa) when the coins were struck for circulation using a bronze alloy.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yen_and_yuan_sign
# SENT:  In the 1993 Turkmen orthography, the Yen sign was used as the capital form of ÿ and represented the sound /j/.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/100_yen_coin
# SENT:  The design of the coin was changed in 1959 which removed Latin script ("Yen"), and changed the reverse side to show a sheaf of rice.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:JPYConvert
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Japan_1870_20_Yen_(alt).jpg
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category_talk:Japanese_yen
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/5_yen_coin
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Japanese_yen_coins
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/20_yen_coin
# SENT:  Twenty Yen coins spanned three different Imperial eras before mintage was halted in 1932.
# SENT:  Between 2005 and 2007 the Ministry of Finance released over 30,000 gold coins of 5, 10 and 20 Yen denominations that had been kept in vaults.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1_rin_coin
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japan
# WORDPAIR: Greece Europe
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greece
# SENT:  During post-classical and early modern Europe, green was the color commonly associated with wealth, merchants, bankers, and the gentry, while red was reserved for the nobility.
# SENT:  It was the color of the banner of Muhammad, and is found in the flags of nearly all Islamic countries.In surveys made in American, European, and Islamic countries, green is the color most commonly associated with nature, life, health, youth, spring, hope, and envy.
# SENT:  In the European Union and the United States, green is also sometimes associated with toxicity and poor health, but in China and most of Asia, its associations are very positive, as the symbol of fertility and happiness.
# SENT:  However, comparative linguistics makes clear that these terms were coined independently, over the past few millennia, and there is no identifiable single Proto-Indo-European or word for "green".
# SENT:  "Green" in modern European languages corresponds to about 520–570 nm, but many historical and non-European languages make other choices, e.g.
# SENT:  It was widely used in miniature paintings in Europe and Persia in the 16th and 17th centuries.
# SENT:  Green eyes are most common in Northern and Central Europe.
# SENT:  They can also be found in Southern Europe, West Asia, Central Asia, and South Asia.
# SENT:  Among European Americans, green eyes are most common among those of recent Celtic and Germanic ancestry, about 16%.
# SENT:  Neolithic cave paintings do not have traces of green pigments, but neolithic peoples in northern Europe did make a green dye for clothing, made from the leaves of the birch tree.
# SENT:  It also symbolized the sea, which was called the "Very Green".In Ancient Greece, green and blue were sometimes considered the same color, and the same word sometimes described the color of the sea and the color of trees.
# SENT:  In the 1980s green became a political symbol, the color of the Green Party in Germany and in many other European countries.
# SENT:  Green is the color most commonly associated in Europe and the United States with nature, vivacity and life.
# SENT:  It is the color of many environmental organizations, such as Greenpeace, and of the Green Parties in Europe.
# SENT:  A green cross is commonly used to designate pharmacies in Europe.
# SENT:  Green is the color most commonly associated in the United States and Europe with springtime, freshness, and hope.
# SENT:  Green the color most commonly associated in Europe and the United States with youth.
# SENT:  In the west, the V-Label, a green V designed by the European Vegetarian Union, has been used by food distributors to label vegan and vegetarian options.
# SENT:  Green today is not commonly associated in Europe and the United States with love and sexuality, but in stories of the medieval period it sometimes represented love and the base, natural desires of man.
# SENT:  Modern Chinese dragons are also often green, but unlike European dragons, they are benevolent; Chinese dragons traditionally symbolize potent and auspicious powers, particularly control over water, rainfall, hurricane, and floods.
# SENT:  While it is the color most associated by Europeans and Americans with good health, it is also the color most often associated with toxicity and poison.
# SENT:  Green in Europe and the United States is sometimes associated with status and prosperity.
# SENT:  The SVP was founded on September 22, 1971 and has 90,000 members.In the 1980s green became the color of a number of new European political parties organized around an agenda of environmentalism.
# SENT:  The largest green party in Europe is Alliance '90/The Greens (German: Bündnis 90/Die Grünen) in Germany, which was formed in 1993 from the merger of the German Green Party, founded in West Germany in 1980, and Alliance 90, founded during the Revolution of 1989–1990 in East Germany.
# SENT:  Green parties in Europe have programs based on ecology, grassroots democracy, nonviolence, and social justice.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geography_of_Greece
# SENT:  Greece is a country of the Balkans, in Southeastern Europe, bordered to the north by Albania, North Macedonia and Bulgaria; to the east by Turkey, and is surrounded to the east by the Aegean Sea, to the south by the Cretan and the Libyan Seas, and to the west by the Ionian Sea which separates Greece from Italy.
# SENT:  Greece also has many islands, of various sizes, the largest being Crete, Euboea, Lesvos, Rhodes, Chios, Kefalonia, and Corfu; groups of smaller islands include the Dodecanese and the Cyclades.
# SENT:  According to the CIA World Factbook, Greece has 13,676 kilometres (8,498 mi) of coastline, the largest in the Mediterranean Basin.Greece's latitude ranges from 35°N to 42°N and its longitude from 19°E to 28°E.
# SENT:  Greece is located in Southern Europe, bordering the Ionian Sea and the Mediterranean Sea, between Albania and Turkey.
# SENT:  Greece's coastline measures 13,676 km (8,498 mi).80% of Greece is mountainous.
# SENT:  Central and western Greece contain high and steep peaks intersected by many canyons and other karstic landscapes, including the Meteora and the Vikos Gorges – the latter being the world's deepest canyon in proportion to its width, and the third deepest after the Copper Canyon in Mexico and the Grand Canyon in the United States, plunging vertically for more than 1,100 metres.Mount Olympus is the highest point in Greece, the 7th highest and the 9th most prominent mountain in mainland Europe (together with Gerlachovský štít and including Großglockner as a separate mountain), rising to 2,917 m above sea level.
# SENT:  The Rhodope Mountains form the border between Greece and Bulgaria; that area is covered with vast and thick forests.
# SENT:  Greece's lowest point is sea level.Plains are found in eastern Thessaly, in central Macedonia and in Thrace.
# SENT:  Mainland Greece forms the southernmost part of the Balkan peninsula with two additional smaller peninsulas projecting from it: the Chalkidiki and the Peloponnese.
# SENT:  To the south the mainland narrows and includes the regions of Epirus, Thessaly and Central Greece, where the region of Attica and the capital city Athens are located.
# SENT:  Mainland Greece covers about 80% of the total territory and is largely mountainous.
# SENT:  The largest mountain range of Greece is the Pindus range, the southern extension of the Dinaric Alps, which forms the spine of the Greek mainland, separating Epirus from Thessaly and Macedonia.
# SENT:  The islands of the Aegean Sea are situated between mainland Greece to the west and north, Anatolia to the east and the island of Crete to the south.
# SENT:  The six northern islands lie off the western coast of Greece, in the Ionian Sea.
# SENT:  Crete is the largest island of Greece and the second largest in the Eastern Mediterranean, after Cyprus.
# SENT:  Greece is a mostly mountainous country with a very long coastline, filled with peninsulas and islands.
# SENT:  Greece's natural hazards include severe earthquakes, floods, droughts and wildfires.
# SENT:  Current environmental issues in Greece include air pollution and water pollution.
# SENT:  A Geological Companion to Greece and the Aegean by Michael and Reynold Higgins, Cornell University Press, 1996 This article incorporates public domain material from World Factbook.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Greece
# SENT:  The history of Greece encompasses the history of the territory of the modern nation-state of Greece as well as that of the Greek people and the areas they inhabited and ruled historically.
# SENT:  The scope of Greek habitation and rule has varied throughout the ages and as a result, the history of Greece is similarly elastic in what it includes.
# SENT:  Generally, the history of Greece is divided into the following periods:
# SENT:  Paleolithic Greece, starting c. 3.3 million years ago and ending in 20000 BC.
# SENT:  Significant geomorphological and climatic changes occurred in the modern Greek area which were definitive for the development of fauna and flora and the survival of Homo sapiens in the region.Mesolithic Greece, starting in 13000 BC and ending around 7000 BC, was a period of long and slow development of primitive human "proto-communities".Neolithic Greece, beginning with the establishment of agricultural societies around 7000 BC and ending c. 3200 – c. 3100 BC, was a vital part of the early history of Greece because it was the base for early Bronze Age civilizations in the area.
# SENT:  The first organized communities developed and basic art became more advanced in Neolithic Greece.Bronze Age Greece (c. 3200 – c. 1100 BC) began with the transition to a metal-based economy during the Early Helladic period of mainland Greece (c. 3200 – c. 2000 BC).
# SENT:  Ancient Greece usually encompasses Greek antiquity, as well as part of the region's late prehistory (Late Bronze Age).
# SENT:  Roman Greece, covering the period of the Roman conquest of Greece from 146 BC – 324 AD
# SENT:  Byzantine Greece covers the period of Greece under the Byzantine Empire, lasting from the establishment of Constantinople as the capital city of Byzantium in 324 AD until the fall of Constantinople in 1453.
# SENT:  Frankish/Latin Greece (including the Venetian possessions) lasted from the Fourth Crusade in 1204 AD to 1797, the year of the disestablishment of the Venetian Republic.
# SENT:  Ottoman Greece covers the period of Ottoman occupation of Greece from 1453 until the Greek Revolution of 1821.
# SENT:  Modern Greece covers the period from 1821 to present.At its cultural and geographical peak, Greek civilization spread from Egypt all the way to the Hindu Kush mountains in Afghanistan.
# SENT:  Turkey, Albania, Italy, Libya, Levant, Armenia, Georgia), and Greek emigrants have assimilated into differing societies across the globe (e.g., North America, Australia, Northern Europe, South Africa).
# SENT:  At present, most Greeks live in the modern states of Greece (independent since 1821) and Cyprus.
# SENT:  Fossils of one of the earliest pre-humans (Ouranopithecus macedoniensis, 9.6–8.7 million years ago), and of quite possibly the oldest direct ancestor of all humans (Graecopithecus, 7.2 million years ago) were found in Greece.
# SENT:  The Paleolithic period is generally understudied in Greece because research has traditionally focused on the later parts of prehistory (Neolithic, Bronze Age) and the Classical times.
# SENT:  The earliest traces of human habitation in present-day Greece were discovered at Petralona Cave in Chalkidiki, Macedonia and date back 1 million years.
# SENT:  The Apidima Cave in Mani, southern Greece, contains the oldest known remains of anatomically modern humans outside of Africa, dated to 210,000 years ago.
# SENT:  This is partly due to the intense tectonic activity in the Greek area and the rise and fall of the Aegean Sea which destroyed every trace of habitation from some geographical regions.Paleolithic finds from Greece were first reported in 1867, but the first organized research on the sites was conducted many years later, between 1927 and 1931, by the Austrian archaeologist Adalbert Markovits.
# SENT:  The Mesolithic in Greece occurred between the Upper Paleolithic and the Neolithic.
# SENT:  Mesolithic sites in Greece were limited, and the majority are located near the coast.
# SENT:  Franchthi cave and Theopetra are among the most important Mesolithic sites in Greece and Southeast Europe, and were inhabited almost continuously throughout the Paleolithic and the Mesolithic Period.
# SENT:  The Neolithic Revolution reached Europe beginning in 7000–6500 BC when agriculturalists from the Near East entered the Greek peninsula from Anatolia by island-hopping through the Aegean Sea.
# SENT:  The earliest known Neolithic sites with developed agricultural economies in Europe, dated 8500–9000 BP, were found in Greece.
# SENT:  Mycenaean civilization originated and evolved from the society and culture of the Early and Middle Helladic periods in mainland Greece.
# SENT:  Mycenaean Greece is the Late Helladic Bronze Age civilization of Ancient Greece, and it formed the historical setting of the epics of Homer and most of Greek mythology and religion.
# SENT:  The Mycenaean period takes its name from the archaeological site Mycenae in the northeastern Argolid, in the Peloponnesos of southern Greece.
# SENT:  During this period, Greece experienced a decline in population and literacy.
# SENT:  Ancient Greece refers to a period of Greek history that lasted from the Greek Dark Ages (c. 1050 – c. 750 BC) to the end of antiquity (c. 600 AD).
# SENT:  Traditionally, the Ancient Greek period was taken to begin with the date of the first Olympic Games in 776 BC, but most historians now extend the term back to about 1000 BC, toward the beginning of the Greek Dark Ages.The Greek Dark Ages are succeeded by the Archaic period, which began c. 800 BC and lasted until the second Persian invasion of Greece in 480 BC.
# SENT:  It was during this period that the Greek alphabet and early Greek literature developed, as well as the poleis ("city-states") of Ancient Greece.
# SENT:  Not everyone treats the Classical Greek and Hellenic periods as distinct—some writers treat the Ancient Greek civilization as a continuum running until the proliferation of Christianity in the 3rd century AD.Ancient Greece is considered by many historians to be the foundational culture of Western civilization.
# SENT:  Greek culture was a powerful influence in the Roman Empire, which carried a version of it to many parts of Europe.
# SENT:  Ancient Greek civilization has been immensely influential on the language, politics, educational systems, philosophy, art, and architecture of the modern world, particularly during the Renaissance in Western Europe and again during various neo-classical revivals in 18th- and 19th-century Europe and the Americas.
# SENT:  By the late 6th century BC, the Achaemenid Persian Empire ruled over all Greek city-states in Ionia (the western coast of modern-day Turkey) and had made territorial gains in the Balkans and Eastern Europe proper as well.
# SENT:  Caracalla's decree did not set in motion the processes that led to the transfer of power from Italy and the West to Greece and the East, but rather accelerated them, setting the foundations for the millennium-long rise of Greece, in the form of the Eastern Roman Empire, as a major power in Europe and the Mediterranean in the Middle Ages.
# SENT:  Andalusian art in Western Europe was also influenced by Byzantium.
# SENT:  In the first, the Greek intelligentsia migrated to Western Europe, influencing the advent of the European Renaissance.
# SENT:  After his assassination, the European powers turned Greece into a monarchy; the first King, Otto, came from Bavaria and the second, George I, from Denmark.
# SENT:  As the cities modernized, businessmen adopted the latest styles of Western European architecture.
# SENT:  The junta government's accession to power lead to an isolation to Greece from European affairs and froze Greece's entry to the European Union.
# SENT:  Greece rejoined NATO in 1980, joined the European Union (EU) in 1981 and adopted the euro as its currency in 2001.
# SENT:  In October 2011, Eurozone leaders also agreed on a proposal to write off 50% of Greek debt owed to private creditors, increasing the European Financial Stability Facility amount to about €1 trillion, and requiring European banks to achieve 9% capitalization to reduce the risk of contagion to other countries.
# SENT:  Boletsi, M. "The futurity of things past: Thinking Greece beyond crisis."
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outline_of_Greece
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Greece_and_the_European_Union
# PAGE:  https://sco.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greece
# SENT:  During post-classical and early modern Europe, green was the color commonly associated with wealth, merchants, bankers, and the gentry, while red was reserved for the nobility.
# SENT:  It was the color of the banner of Muhammad, and is found in the flags of nearly all Islamic countries.In surveys made in American, European, and Islamic countries, green is the color most commonly associated with nature, life, health, youth, spring, hope, and envy.
# SENT:  In the European Union and the United States, green is also sometimes associated with toxicity and poor health, but in China and most of Asia, its associations are very positive, as the symbol of fertility and happiness.
# SENT:  However, comparative linguistics makes clear that these terms were coined independently, over the past few millennia, and there is no identifiable single Proto-Indo-European or word for "green".
# SENT:  "Green" in modern European languages corresponds to about 520–570 nm, but many historical and non-European languages make other choices, e.g.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:12, WORD1_SENTS:44, WORD2_SENTS:38
# WORDPAIR: India Indian
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/India
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian
# SENT:  India, officially the Republic of India (Hindi: Bhārat Gaṇarājya), is a country in South Asia.
# SENT:  Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west; China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the north; and Bangladesh and Myanmar to the east.
# SENT:  In the Indian Ocean, India is in the vicinity of Sri Lanka and the Maldives; its Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Thailand, Myanmar, and Indonesia.
# SENT:  Modern humans arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa no later than 55,000 years ago.
# SENT:  By 1200 BCE, an archaic form of Sanskrit, an Indo-European language, had diffused into India from the northwest.
# SENT:  Preserved by a resolutely vigilant oral tradition, the Rigveda records the dawning of Hinduism in India.
# SENT:  The Dravidian languages of India were supplanted in the northern and western regions.
# SENT:  In South India, the Middle kingdoms exported Dravidian-languages scripts and religious cultures to the kingdoms of Southeast Asia.In the early medieval era, Christianity, Islam, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism became established on India's southern and western coasts.
# SENT:  Muslim armies from Central Asia intermittently overran India's northern plains,
# SENT:  eventually founding the Delhi Sultanate, and drawing northern India into the cosmopolitan networks of medieval Islam.
# SENT:  In the 15th century, the Vijayanagara Empire created a long-lasting composite Hindu culture in south India.
# SENT:  Gradually expanding rule of the British East India Company followed, turning India into a colonial economy, but also consolidating its sovereignty.
# SENT:  The rights promised to Indians were granted slowly, but technological changes were introduced, and modern ideas of education and the public life took root.
# SENT:  In 1947 the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two independent dominions, a Hindu-majority Dominion of India and a Muslim-majority Dominion of Pakistan, amid large-scale loss of life and an unprecedented migration.India has been a federal republic since 1950, governed through a democratic parliamentary system.
# SENT:  India's population grew from 361 million in 1951 to almost 1.4 billion in 2022.
# SENT:  India has become a fast-growing major economy and a hub for information technology services, with an expanding middle class.
# SENT:  Indian movies, music, and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture.
# SENT:  India has substantially reduced its rate of poverty, though at the cost of increasing economic inequality.
# SENT:  India is a nuclear-weapon state, which ranks high in military expenditure.
# SENT:  Among the socio-economic challenges India faces are gender inequality, child malnutrition,
# SENT:  India's land is megadiverse, with four biodiversity hotspots.
# SENT:  India's wildlife, which has traditionally been viewed with tolerance in India's culture, is supported among these forests, and elsewhere, in protected habitats.
# SENT:  According to the Oxford English Dictionary (third edition 2009), the name "India" is derived from the Classical Latin India, a reference to South Asia and an uncertain region to its east; and in turn derived successively from: Hellenistic Greek India ( Ἰνδία); ancient Greek Indos ( Ἰνδός); Old Persian Hindush, an eastern province of the Achaemenid Empire; and ultimately its cognate, the Sanskrit Sindhu, or "river," specifically the Indus River and, by implication, its well-settled southern basin.
# SENT:  The ancient Greeks referred to the Indians as Indoi (Ἰνδοί), which translates as "The people of the Indus".The term Bharat (Bhārat; pronounced [ˈbʱaːɾət] (listen)), mentioned in both Indian epic poetry and the Constitution of India, is used in its variations by many Indian languages.
# SENT:  A modern rendering of the historical name Bharatavarsha, which applied originally to North India, Bharat gained increased currency from the mid-19th century as a native name for India.Hindustan ([ɦɪndʊˈstaːn] (listen)) is a Middle Persian name for India, introduced during the Mughal Empire and used widely since.
# SENT:  Its meaning has varied, referring to a region encompassing present-day northern India and Pakistan or to India in its near entirety.
# SENT:  By 55,000 years ago, the first modern humans, or Homo sapiens, had arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa, where they had earlier evolved.
# SENT:  These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation, the first urban culture in South Asia, which flourished during 2500–1900 BCE in what is now Pakistan and western India.
# SENT:  In South India, a progression to sedentary life is indicated by the large number of megalithic monuments dating from this period, as well as by nearby traces of agriculture, irrigation tanks, and craft traditions.
# SENT:  Buddhism, based on the teachings of Gautama Buddha, attracted followers from all social classes excepting the middle class; chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India.
# SENT:  In North India, Hinduism asserted patriarchal control within the family, leading to increased subordination of women.
# SENT:  By the 4th and 5th centuries, the Gupta Empire had created a complex system of administration and taxation in the greater Ganges Plain; this system became a model for later Indian kingdoms.
# SENT:  Classical Sanskrit literature flowered as well, and Indian science, astronomy, medicine, and mathematics made significant advances.
# SENT:  The Indian early medieval age, from 600 to 1200 CE, is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity.
# SENT:  They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent.
# SENT:  Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised drew citizens in great numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well.
# SENT:  Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation.
# SENT:  By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in South-East Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Brunei, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
# SENT:  Indian merchants, scholars, and sometimes armies were involved in this transmission; South-East Asians took the initiative as well, with many sojourning in Indian seminaries and translating Buddhist and Hindu texts into their languages.After the 10th century, Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans, using swift-horse cavalry and raising vast armies united by ethnicity and religion, repeatedly overran South Asia's north-western plains, leading eventually to the establishment of the Islamic Delhi Sultanate in 1206.
# SENT:  The sultanate was to control much of North India and to make many forays into South India.
# SENT:  Although at first disruptive for the Indian elites, the sultanate largely left its vast non-Muslim subject population to its own laws and customs.
# SENT:  By repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century, the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia, setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers, learned men, mystics, traders, artists, and artisans from that region into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north.
# SENT:  The sultanate's raiding and weakening of the regional kingdoms of South India paved the way for the indigenous Vijayanagara Empire.
# SENT:  Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate, the empire came to control much of peninsular India, and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards.
# SENT:  In the early 16th century, northern India, then under mainly Muslim rulers, fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors.
# SENT:  The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India's economic expansion, resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture.
# SENT:  Newly coherent social groups in northern and western India, such as the Marathas, the Rajputs, and the Sikhs, gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule, which, through collaboration or adversity, gave them both recognition and military experience.
# SENT:  Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India.
# SENT:  By the early 18th century, with the lines between commercial and political dominance being increasingly blurred, a number of European trading companies, including the English East India Company, had established coastal outposts.
# SENT:  The East India Company's control of the seas, greater resources, and more advanced military training and technology led it to increasingly assert its military strength and caused it to become attractive to a portion of the Indian elite; these factors were crucial in allowing the company to gain control over the Bengal region by 1765 and sideline the other European companies.
# SENT:  However, disaffection with the company also grew during this time and set off the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
# SENT:  In the decades following, public life gradually emerged all over India, leading eventually to the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885.The rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacks and many small farmers became dependent on the whims of far-away markets.
# SENT:  There was an increase in the number of large-scale famines, and, despite the risks of infrastructure development borne by Indian taxpayers, little industrial employment was generated for Indians.
# SENT:  The railway network provided critical famine relief, notably reduced the cost of moving goods, and helped nascent Indian-owned industry.
# SENT:  After World War I, in which approximately one million Indians served, a new period began.
# SENT:  It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislation, by more strident Indian calls for self-rule, and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non-co-operation, of which Mahatma Gandhi would become the leader and enduring symbol.
# SENT:  During the 1930s, slow legislative reform was enacted by the British; the Indian National Congress won victories in the resulting elections.
# SENT:  The next decade was beset with crises: Indian participation in World War II, the Congress's final push for non-co-operation, and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism.
# SENT:  Indian films, music, and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture.
# SENT:  India accounts for the bulk of the Indian subcontinent, lying atop the Indian tectonic plate, a part of the Indo-Australian Plate.
# SENT:  India's defining geological processes began 75 million years ago when the Indian Plate, then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, began a north-eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south-west, and later, south and south-east.
# SENT:  These dual processes, driven by convection in the Earth's mantle, both created the Indian Ocean and caused the Indian continental crust eventually to under-thrust Eurasia and to uplift the Himalayas.
# SENT:  The original Indian plate makes its first appearance above the sediment in the ancient Aravalli range, which extends from the Delhi Ridge in a southwesterly direction.
# SENT:  The remaining Indian Plate survives as peninsular India, the oldest and geologically most stable part of India.
# SENT:  According to the Indian naval hydrographic charts, the mainland coastline consists of the following: 43% sandy beaches; 11% rocky shores, including cliffs; and 46% mudflats or marshy shores.Major Himalayan-origin rivers that substantially flow through India include the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, both of which drain into the Bay of Bengal.
# SENT:  India has two archipelagos: the Lakshadweep, coral atolls off India's south-western coast; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea.Indian climate is strongly influenced by the Himalayas and the Thar Desert, both of which drive the economically and culturally pivotal summer and winter monsoons.
# SENT:  The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in, keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes.
# SENT:  Fully a third of Indian plant species are endemic.
# SENT:  India has two natural zones of thorn forest, one in the Deccan Plateau, immediately east of the Western Ghats, and the other in the western part of the Indo-Gangetic plain, now turned into rich agricultural land by irrigation, its features no longer visible.Among the Indian subcontinent's notable indigenous trees are the astringent Azadirachta indica, or neem, which is widely used in rural Indian herbal medicine, and the luxuriant Ficus religiosa, or peepul, which is displayed on the ancient seals of Mohenjo-daro, and under which the Buddha is recorded in the Pali canon to have sought enlightenment.Many Indian species have descended from those of Gondwana, the southern supercontinent from which India separated more than 100 million years ago.
# SENT:  However, volcanism and climatic changes later caused the extinction of many endemic Indian forms.
# SENT:  Critically endangered species include: the gharial, a crocodilian; the great Indian bustard; and the Indian white-rumped vulture, which has become nearly extinct by having ingested the carrion of diclofenac-treated cattle.
# SENT:  The pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered Indian wildlife.
# SENT:  A parliamentary republic with a multi-party system, it has eight recognised national parties, including the Indian National Congress (INC) and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and more than 40 regional parties.
# SENT:  The Congress is considered centre-left in Indian political culture, and the BJP right-wing.
# SENT:  Again in the 2004 Indian general elections, no party won an absolute majority, but the Congress emerged as the largest single party, forming another successful coalition: the United Progressive Alliance (UPA).
# SENT:  The executive of the Indian government consists of the president, the vice president, and the Union Council of Ministers—with the cabinet being its executive committee—headed by the prime minister.
# SENT:  In the Indian parliamentary system, the executive is subordinate to the legislature; the prime minister and their council are directly responsible to the lower house of the parliament.
# SENT:  Two seats of parliament, reserved for Anglo-Indians in the article 331, have been scrapped.
# SENT:  In the late 1980s, the Indian military twice intervened abroad at the invitation of the host country: a peace-keeping operation in Sri Lanka between 1987 and 1990; and an armed intervention to prevent a 1988 coup d'état attempt in the Maldives.
# SENT:  It comprises the Indian Army, the Indian Navy, the Indian Air Force, and the Indian Coast Guard.
# SENT:  The official Indian defence budget for 2011 was US$36.03 billion, or 1.83% of GDP.
# SENT:  Much of the military expenditure was focused on defence against Pakistan and countering growing Chinese influence in the Indian Ocean.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:50, WORD1_SENTS:32, WORD2_SENTS:0
# WORDPAIR: Canberra Australia
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canberra
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canberra
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australian_Capital_Territory
# SENT:  The Australian Capital Territory (commonly abbreviated as ACT), known as the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) until 1938, is a landlocked federal territory of Australia containing the national capital Canberra and some surrounding townships.
# SENT:  It is located in southeastern Australian mainland as an enclave completely within the state of New South Wales.
# SENT:  Founded after Federation as the seat of government for the new nation, the territory hosts the headquarters of all important institutions of the Australian Government.
# SENT:  On 1 January 1901, federation of the colonies of Australia was achieved.
# SENT:  Section 125 of the new Australian Constitution provided that land, situated in New South Wales and at least 100 mi (160 km) from Sydney, would be ceded to the new federal government.
# SENT:  Following discussion and exploration of various areas within New South Wales, the Seat of Government Act 1908 was passed in 1908 which specified a capital in the Yass-Canberra region.
# SENT:  The territory was transferred to the federal government by New South Wales in 1911, two years prior to the capital city being founded and formally named as Canberra in 1913.
# SENT:  While the overwhelming majority of the population reside in the city of Canberra in the ACT's north-east, the territory also includes some surrounding townships such as Williamsdale, Naas, Uriarra, Tharwa and Hall.
# SENT:  Despite a common misconception, the Jervis Bay Territory is not part of the ACT although the laws of the Australian Capital Territory apply as if Jervis Bay did form part of the ACT.
# SENT:  The Australian Capital Territory is home to many important institutions of the federal government, national monuments and museums.
# SENT:  This includes the Parliament of Australia, the High Court of Australia, the Australian Defence Force Academy and the Australian War Memorial.
# SENT:  It also hosts the majority of foreign embassies in Australia as well as regional headquarters of many international organisations, not-for-profit groups, lobbying groups and professional associations.
# SENT:  Several major universities also have campuses in the ACT including the Australian National University, the University of Canberra, the University of New South Wales, Charles Sturt University and the Australian Catholic University.
# SENT:  With 453,324 residents, the Australian Capital Territory is the second smallest mainland state or territory by population.
# SENT:  Aboriginal Australian peoples have long inhabited the area.
# SENT:  The 1820s saw further exploration in the Canberra area associated with the construction of a road from Sydney to the Goulburn plains.
# SENT:  The issue of the Murrumbidgee was solved in 1821 when Throsby mounted a third expedition and successfully reached the watercourse, on the way providing the first detailed account of the land where Canberra now resides.
# SENT:  Moore formally purchased the site in 1826 and named the property Canberry or Canberra.A significant influx of population and economic activity occurred around the 1850s goldrushes.
# SENT:  In 1898, a referendum on a proposed Constitution was held in four of the colonies – New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania.
# SENT:  Section 125 of the Australian Constitution thus provided that, following Federation in 1901, land would be ceded freely to the new Federal Government.This, however, left open the question of where to locate the capital.
# SENT:  In 1906 and after significant deliberations, New South Wales agreed to cede sufficient land on the condition that it was in the Yass-Canberra region, this site being closer to Sydney.
# SENT:  Initially, Dalgety, New South Wales remained at the forefront, but Yass-Canberra prevailed after voting by federal representatives.
# SENT:  The Seat of Government Act 1908 was passed in 1908, which repealed the 1904 Act and specified a capital in the Yass-Canberra region.
# SENT:  Government surveyor Charles Scrivener was deployed to the region in the same year to map out a specific site and, after an extensive search, settled upon the present location, basing the borders primarily on the need to secure a stable water supply for the planned capital.The Australian Capital Territory was transferred to the Commonwealth by New South Wales on 1 January 1911, two years before the naming of Canberra as the national capital on 20 March 1913.
# SENT:  The official naming of Canberra occurred on 12 March 1913 and construction began immediately.After Griffin's departure following difficulty in implementing his project, the Federal Capital Advisory Committee was established in 1920 to advise the government of the construction efforts.
# SENT:  In 1934, Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory was established.From 1938 to 1957, the National Capital Planning and Development Committee continued to plan the further expansion of Canberra.
# SENT:  However, the National Capital Planning and Development Committee did not have executive power, and decisions were made on the development of Canberra without the committee's consultation.
# SENT:  During this time, Prime Minister Robert Menzies regarded the state of the national capital as an embarrassment.After World War II, there was a shortage of housing and office space in Canberra.
# SENT:  Nevertheless, in 1988, the new minister for the Australian Capital Territory Gary Punch received a report recommending the abolition of the National Capital Development Commission and the formation of a locally elected government.
# SENT:  Punch recommended that the Hawke government accept the report's recommendations and subsequently Clyde Holding introduced legislation to grant self-government to the territory in October 1988.The enactment on 6 December 1988 of the Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988 established the framework for self-government.
# SENT:  The first election for the 17-member Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly was held on 4 March 1989.The initial years of self-government were difficult and unstable.
# SENT:  At the first election, 4 of the 17 seats were won by anti-self-government single-issue parties due to a protest vote by disgruntled Canberrans and a total of 8 were won by minor parties and independents.In 1992, Labor won eight seats and the minor parties and independents won only three.
# SENT:  The Australian Capital Territory is the smallest mainland territory (aside from the Jervis Bay Territory) and covers a total land area of 2,280 km2 (880 sq mi), slightly smaller than Luxembourg.
# SENT:  The city area of Canberra occupies the north-eastern corner of this area.
# SENT:  The Australian Capital Territory includes the city of Canberra and some other townships such as Williamsdale, Naas, Uriarra, Tharwa and Hall.
# SENT:  The Australian Capital Territory also contains agricultural land (sheep, dairy cattle, vineyards and small amounts of crops) and a large area of national park (Namadgi National Park), much of it mountainous and forested.
# SENT:  Tidbinbilla is a locality to the south-west of Canberra that features the Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve and the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex, operated by the United States' National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) as part of its Deep Space Network.
# SENT:  Much higher rainfall occurs in the mountains to the west of Canberra compared to the east.
# SENT:  Snow is rare in Canberra's city centre, but the surrounding areas get annual snowfall through winter and often the snow-capped mountains can be seen from the city.
# SENT:  The last significant snowfall in the city centre was in 1968.Smoke haze became synonymous with the 2019/2020 Australian summer.
# SENT:  On 1 January 2020 Canberra had the worst air quality of any major city in the world, with an AQI of 7700 (USAQI 949).
# SENT:  Notable geological formations in the Australian Capital Territory include the Canberra Formation, the Pittman Formation, Black Mountain Sandstone and State Circle Shale.
# SENT:  At the time, these were the oldest fossils discovered in Australia, though this record has now been far surpassed.
# SENT:  During this period the region along with most of Eastern Australia was part of the ocean floor; formations from this period include the Black Mountain Sandstone formation and the Pittman Formation consisting largely of quartz-rich sandstone, siltstone and shale.
# SENT:  These formations became exposed when the ocean floor was raised by a major volcanic activity in the Devonian forming much of the east coast of Australia.
# SENT:  Most plants in the ACT are characteristic of the Flora of Australia and include well known plants such as Grevillea, Eucalyptus trees and kangaroo grass.
# SENT:  The native forest in the Canberra region was almost wholly eucalypt species and provided a resource for fuel and domestic purposes.
# SENT:  Since then, plantations have been expanded, with the benefit of reducing erosion in the Cotter catchment, and the forests are also popular recreation areas.The fauna of the territory includes representatives from most major Australian animal groups.
# SENT:  Unlike the States of Australia which have their own constitutions, territories like the ACT are governed under a Commonwealth statute—for the ACT, the Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988.
# SENT:  The electoral system cannot be made except by a two-thirds majority in the Assembly or a majority vote of support at a public referendum.There is no level of local government below the Territory government as in the States and the functions associated with local government are carried out principally by the Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate.
# SENT:  These courts are the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory, the Magistrates Court of the Australian Capital Territory and the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
# SENT:  The Federal Court has concurrent jurisdiction over civil matters arising under Territory law, a fact which has become increasingly important to the practice of defamation law across Australia.Policing services are provided by the ACT Policing unit of the Australian Federal Police under agreements between the territory government, the federal government, and the police force.
# SENT:  Canberra had the lowest rate of crime of any capital city in Australia as of February 2019.
# SENT:  In Australia's Federal Parliament, the ACT is represented by five federal members: three members of the House of Representatives represent the Division of Bean, the Division of Canberra and the Division of Fenner, and it is one of only two territories to be represented in the Senate, with two Senators (the other being the Northern Territory).
# SENT:  The Australian Bureau of Statistics estimates that the population of the territory was 453,324 on 31 December 2021, with an annual growth in 2021 of 0.4%.
# SENT:  A 2019 projection estimated the population would reach to approximately 700,000 by 2058.The overwhelming majority of the population reside in the city of Canberra.At the 2016 census, the median weekly income for people in the territory aged over 15 was $998 while the national average was $662.The average level of degree qualification in the ACT is higher than the national average.
# SENT:  The Australian Capital Territory consists of the city of Canberra and some surrounding townships including Williamsdale, Naas, Uriarra, Tharwa and Hall.
# SENT:  The urban areas of Canberra are organised into a hierarchy of districts, town centres, group centres, local suburbs as well as other industrial areas and villages.
# SENT:  North Canberra: mostly settled in the 1920s and '30s, with expansion up to the 1960s, now 14 suburbs;
# SENT:  South Canberra: settled from the 1920s to '60s, 13 suburbs;
# SENT:  Molonglo Valley: first suburbs currently under construction.The North and South Canberra districts are substantially based on Walter Burley Griffin's designs.
# SENT:  In 1967, the then National Capital Development Commission adopted the "Y Plan" which laid out future urban development in Canberra around a series of central shopping and commercial area known as the 'town centres' linked by freeways, the layout of which roughly resembled the shape of the letter Y, with Tuggeranong at the base of the Y and Belconnen and Gungahlin located at the ends of the arms of the Y.
# SENT:  Of inhabitants born outside of Australia, the most prevalent countries of birth were India, England, China, Nepal and New Zealand.2.0% of the population, or 8,949 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders) in 2021.
# SENT:  Almost all educational institutions in the Australian Capital Territory are located within Canberra.
# SENT:  The ACT public education system schooling is normally split up into Pre-School, Primary School (K-6), High School (7–10) and College (11–12) followed by studies at university or CIT (Canberra Institute of Technology).
# SENT:  The two main tertiary institutions are the Australian National University (ANU) in Acton and the University of Canberra (UC) in Bruce.
# SENT:  There are also two religious university campuses in Canberra: Signadou is a campus of the Australian Catholic University and St Mark's Theological College is a campus of Charles Sturt University.
# SENT:  Tertiary level vocational education is also available through the multi-campus Canberra Institute of Technology.
# SENT:  The Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA) and the Royal Military College, Duntroon (RMC) are in the suburb of Campbell in Canberra's inner northeast.
# SENT:  ADFA teaches military undergraduates and postgraduates and is officially a campus of the University of New South Wales while Duntroon provides Australian Army Officer training.
# SENT:  The Australian Capital Territory is home to a number of major professional sports league franchise teams including the ACT Brumbies (Rugby Union), Canberra United (Football), Canberra Raiders (Rugby League) and the Canberra Capitals (Basketball).
# SENT:  The Greater Western Sydney Giants (Australian Rules) play three regular season matches a year and one pre-season match in Canberra at Manuka Oval.
# SENT:  The territory is home to many national monuments and institutions such as the Australian War Memorial, the National Gallery of Australia, the National Portrait Gallery, the National Library, the National Archives, the Australian Academy of Science, the National Film and Sound Archive and the National Museum.
# SENT:  Many Commonwealth government buildings in Canberra are open to the public, including Parliament House, the High Court and the Royal Australian Mint.Lake Burley Griffin is the site of the Captain James Cook Memorial and the National Carillon.
# SENT:  Other sites of interest include the Telstra Tower, the Australian National Botanic Gardens, the National Zoo and Aquarium, the National Dinosaur Museum and Questacon – the National Science and Technology Centre.
# SENT:  The Canberra Museum and Gallery in the city is a repository of local history and art, housing a permanent collection and visiting exhibitions.
# SENT:  Calthorpes' House in Red Hill is a well-preserved example of a 1920s house from Canberra's very early days.Canberra has many venues for live music and theatre: the Canberra Theatre and Playhouse which hosts many major concerts and productions; and Llewellyn Hall (within the ANU School of Music), a world-class concert hall are two of the most notable.
# SENT:  The Albert Hall was Canberra's first performing arts venue, opened in 1928.
# SENT:  It was the original performance venue for theatre groups such as the Canberra Repertory Society.There are numerous bars and nightclubs which also offer live entertainment, particularly concentrated in the areas of Dickson, Kingston and the city.
# SENT:  Popular cultural events include the National Folk Festival, the Royal Canberra Show, the Summernats car festival, Enlighten festival and the National Multicultural Festival in February.
# SENT:  Canberra and the territory have a daily newspaper, The Canberra Times, which was established in 1926.
# SENT:  Major daily newspapers such as The Daily Telegraph and The Sydney Morning Herald from Sydney, The Age and The Herald Sun from Melbourne as well as national publications The Australian and The Australian Financial Review are also available for purchase via retail outlets or via home delivery in the Australian Capital Territory.
# SENT:  There are also several community operated stations as well as the local and national stations of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
# SENT:  The Australian Capital Territory has two large public hospitals both located in Canberra: the approximately 600-bed Canberra Hospital in Garran and the 174-bed Calvary Public Hospital in Bruce.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:17, WORD1_SENTS:34, WORD2_SENTS:33
# WORDPAIR: Mouse Squeak
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Squeak_the_Mouse
# SENT:  Squeak the Mouse is an Italian black comedy comic strip and later comic book created by artist Massimo Mattioli.
# SENT:  The comic depicts attempts by its title character, the anthropomorphic Squeak the Mouse, to outwit a cat who is chasing him.
# SENT:  The comic satirizes cartoon series such as Tom and Jerry, taking the content to extreme levels, which includes gory horror violence and explicit sexual content.Two issues of a Squeak the Mouse comic book were produced in 1984 and 1992, the first written from the perspective of the cat, who murders the title character, and the second, written from the perspective of Squeak, who murders the cat.
# SENT:  On April 18, 2019, a third issue was published on a new collection titled Squeak the Mouse: The Trilogy.
# SENT:  Squeak the Mouse is a parody of the cartoon series, Tom and Jerry.
# SENT:  Although the style of the drawing is typical of children comics, Squeak indulges in graphic violent, gore, splatter and pornographic scenes.The first issue of the series is written from the perspective of the cat, who is aggravated by Squeak the Mouse, and ultimately murders the title character.
# SENT:  The cat goes to a party and unsuccessfully attempts to have sex with his girlfriend, and instead sleeps with another girl he meets at the party, Squeak the Mouse returns from the dead as a zombie and murders every one of the guests at the party, until the cat stops the mouse by murdering it with a blender.
# SENT:  The next day, the cat engages in an orgy with a number of beautiful women, but Squeak the Mouse returns once more and slaughters each of the women, leading the cat to kill Squeak once more before chasing after another mouse.
# SENT:  The end of the issue assures readers that Squeak is really dead and will not return.
# SENT:  The second issue, Squeak the Mouse 2, begins with a duck who revives Squeak from the pages of the first Squeak the Mouse comic book.
# SENT:  Squeak proceeds to read his own comic, and is horrified by his own murder, and decides to track down the cat and murder him.
# SENT:  However, when Squeak confronts the cat at a screening of The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2, the cat tricks Squeak into feeling sympathy for him, which allows the cat to briefly escape before being murdered by the mouse.
# SENT:  As Squeak boards a plane heading to a tropical island, the cat returns as a zombie and crashes the plane, killing all of the passengers except Squeak, who escapes, and swims to the nearest island, where a pair of women awaken him by performing oral sex on Squeak, leading to another orgy sequence.
# SENT:  The cat turns up on the island and slaughters the women, and Squeak destroys the cat, leaving only its separated bones, which are found by a horror film-loving child, who brings the remains home and reassembles them.
# SENT:  The skeleton cat slaughters the child and his family, and once again goes after Squeak, who finally gets rid of the cat for good, but decides to antagonize another cat.
# SENT:  It had a sequel (Squeak the Mouse 2) published in 1992 also by Éditions Albin Michel and Sefam, Paris.
# SENT:  According to Bernd Metz of Catalan Communications, the book's USA publisher, Squeak the Mouse was ruled not obscene "because it failed the third test of the law... the Miller test as it's called... in that it did not exceed the community standards."
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Squeak!
# SENT:  Squeak is an object-oriented, class-based, and reflective programming language.
# SENT:  Squeak runs on a virtual machine (VM), allowing for a high degree of portability.
# SENT:  The Squeak system includes code for generating a new version of the VM on which it runs, along with a VM simulator written in Squeak.
# SENT:  Dan Ingalls, an important contributor to the Squeak project, wrote the paper upon which Squeak is built, and constructed the architecture for five generations of the Smalltalk language.
# SENT:  Alan Kay is an important contributor to the Squeak project, and Squeak incorporates many elements of his proposed Dynabook concept.
# SENT:  Squeak includes four user interface frameworks:
# SENT:  This is Squeak's main interface.
# SENT:  In 2001 it became clear that the Etoy architecture in Squeak had reached its limits in what the Morphic interface infrastructure could do.
# SENT:  This resulted in a new user interface, proposed to replace the Squeak Morphic user interface in the future.
# SENT:  A model–view–controller (MVC) interface was the primary UI in Squeak versions 3.8 and earlier.
# SENT:  Thus, the term "MVC" in the context of Squeak refers to both one of the available user interface frameworks and the pattern the framework follows.
# SENT:  Many Squeak contributors collaborate on Open Cobalt, a free and open source virtual world browser and construction toolkit built on Squeak.
# SENT:  Squeak 4.0 and later may be downloaded at no cost, including source code, as a prebuilt virtual machine image licensed under the MIT License, with the exception of some of the original Apple code, which is governed by the Apache License.
# SENT:  Squeak was originally released by Apple under its own Squeak License.
# SENT:  While source code was available and modification permitted, the Squeak License contained an indemnity clause that prevented it from qualifying as true free and open-source software.
# SENT:  In 2006, Apple relicensed Squeak twice.
# SENT:  At this point, an effort was also made to address the issue of code contributed by members of the Squeak community, which it was not in Apple's power to unilaterally relicense.
# SENT:  For each contribution made under the Squeak License since 1996, a relicensing statement was obtained authorizing distribution under the MIT license, and finally in March 2010, the end result was released as Squeak 4.0, now under combined MIT and Apache licenses.
# SENT:  The Squeak virtual machine is a family of virtual machines (VMs) used in Smalltalk programming language implementations.
# SENT:  Squeak at Curlie
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laboratory_mouse
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House_mouse
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bubble_and_squeak
# SENT:  The first recorded use of the name listed in the OED dates from 1762; The St James's Chronicle, recording the dishes served at a banquet, included "Bubble and Squeak, garnish'd with Eddowes Cow Bumbo, and Tongue".
# SENT:  A correspondent in The Public Advertiser two years later reported making "a very hearty Meal on fryed Beef and Cabbage; though I could not have touched it had my Wife recommended it to me under the fashionable Appellation of Bubble and Squeak".
# SENT:  In 1791 another London paper recorded the quarterly meeting of the Bubble and Squeak Society at Smithfield.
# SENT:  The OED gives examples from the 18th to the 21st centuries, including, from Coleridge, "... the restless Bubble and Squeak of his Vanity and Discontent", and from D. H. Lawrence, "I can make the most lovely bubble and squeak of a life for myself".
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_squeaky_wheel_gets_the_grease
# SENT:  The Squeaky Wheel: Complaining the Right Way to Get Results, Improve Your Relationships, and Enhance Self-Esteem.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Squeak
# SENT:  Squeak is an object-oriented, class-based, and reflective programming language.
# SENT:  Squeak runs on a virtual machine (VM), allowing for a high degree of portability.
# SENT:  The Squeak system includes code for generating a new version of the VM on which it runs, along with a VM simulator written in Squeak.
# SENT:  Dan Ingalls, an important contributor to the Squeak project, wrote the paper upon which Squeak is built, and constructed the architecture for five generations of the Smalltalk language.
# SENT:  Alan Kay is an important contributor to the Squeak project, and Squeak incorporates many elements of his proposed Dynabook concept.
# SENT:  Squeak includes four user interface frameworks:
# SENT:  This is Squeak's main interface.
# SENT:  In 2001 it became clear that the Etoy architecture in Squeak had reached its limits in what the Morphic interface infrastructure could do.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newsqueak
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_animal_sounds
# PAGE:  https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/squeak
# PAGE:  https://talkingfriends.fandom.com/wiki/Squeak
# PAGE:  https://en.scratch-wiki.info/wiki/Squeak_Tutorial
# PAGE:  https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-french/squeak
# PAGE:  https://www.culinaryschools.org/blog/three-squeaks/
# PAGE:  https://wikirby.com/wiki/Squeaks
# PAGE:  https://en.pons.com/translate/english-bulgarian/squeak
# PAGE:  https://www.thefreedictionary.com/squeak
# PAGE:  http://wiki.squeak.org/squeak/355
# PAGE:  https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Wiki_Help
# PAGE:  https://www.spectrumnews.org/news/toolbox/sophisticated-software-makes-sense-rodent-squeaks/
# WORDPAIR: Oslo Norway
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Old_Town,_Oslo
# SENT:  The Old Town of Oslo (Norwegian: Gamlebyen, pronounced [ˈɡɑ̂mɽəbʏn] (listen)) is a neighbourhood in the inner city of Oslo, Norway, belonging to the borough of Gamle Oslo  and is the oldest urban area within the current capital.
# SENT:  This part of the capital of Norway was simply called Oslo until 1925 while the city as a whole was called Kristiania.
# SENT:  Oslo's old town was established with the urban structure around the year 1000 and was the capital of Norway's dominion in 1314.
# SENT:  The mediaeval town of Oslo is the area in which Oslo's mediaeval ruins of stone and brick are located.
# SENT:  The Franciscan Monastery (partly covered by the Gamlebyen Church and Oslo Hospital) just east of Alna are also in the mediaeval town, despite its location on the "backside" of Alna.
# SENT:  In the centre of the mediaeval town of Oslo is a square, the city's oldest market.
# SENT:  The market was in the area where today's street intersections Oslogate - Bispegata are located.
# SENT:  Mediaeval Oslo had its heyday in the 1300s, when Haakon V Magnusson ruled first as duke (1284-1299) and then as king (1299-1319).
# SENT:  Oslo was a  village with St. Clement's Church and cemetery already extant around the year 1000.
# SENT:  Subsequent archaeological excavations and research have established that Oslo had an urban structure as early as the end of the Viking Age.
# SENT:  Around the year 1100 Oslo's former two stave churches, the old Clement's Church and Old St. Mary's Church, were replaced with stone churches.
# SENT:  The cathedral was named after St. Hallvard of Husaby in Lier, Norway, who was shot when he tried to save an innocent pregnant woman who was accused of theft from two men.
# SENT:  He was Oslo's patron saint.
# SENT:  The bishop replaced a former bishop's palace with a new stone, Oslo Bishop's Castle.
# SENT:  King Haakon had Oslo as his ducal seat while his brother was king, and he made Oslo his permanent royal residence.
# SENT:  In 1314 the king decided that the dean of St. Mary's Church was to be made Chancellor, and be given the State seal of "forever", and so he made Oslo the capital of the kingdom of Norway.
# SENT:  After the Protestant Reformation in 1537, all church and monastery properties were confiscated by the Danish-Norwegian king who had his main residence in Copenhagen, and Oslo lost the last remnants of being an economic centre.
# SENT:  As the Old Town became part of the capital of Oslo in 1859, it was ordered that brick houses be built in this area.
# SENT:  Many new streets were laid out that broke with the Old Town's original footprint.Today the Old Town (Gamlebyen) is an area in the borough of Gamle Oslo, characterised by apartment buildings from the late 1800s and some shops, restaurants and pubs.
# SENT:  Oslo Ladegård.
# SENT:  Rooms from Old Bishop's Palace in Oslo, rebuilt in the 20th century.
# SENT:  Besides Olav's Monastery, partially ruined, partial basement in the current bishop of Oslo's palace.
# SENT:  In recent years the park has been the scene of the festival Oslo Medieval Festival.
# SENT:  Oslo Hospital, established in 1538 in the former Franciscan monastery (founded ca.
# SENT:  Gamlebyen Church, formerly Oslo Hospital Church, was built on the site of the Franciscan monastery from 1290.
# SENT:  
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Oslo
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oslo_(disambiguation)
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oslo_City
# SENT:  Oslo ( OZ-loh, US also  OSS-loh, Norwegian: [ˈʊ̂ʂlʊ ] (listen) or [ˈʊ̂slʊ, ˈʊ̀ʂlʊ]; Southern Sami: Oslove) is the capital and most populous city of Norway.
# SENT:  The municipality of Oslo had a population of 702,543 in 2022, while the city's greater urban area had a population of 1,064,235 in 2022, and the metropolitan area had an estimated population of 1,546,706 in 2021.During the Viking Age, the area was part of Viken.
# SENT:  Oslo was founded as a city at the end of the Viking Age in 1040 under the name Ánslo, and established as a kaupstad or trading place in 1048 by Harald Hardrada.
# SENT:  The city was elevated to a bishopric in 1070 and a capital under Haakon V of Norway around 1300.
# SENT:  The city functioned as the capital of Norway during the 1814–1905 union between Sweden and Norway.
# SENT:  In 1925, the city, after incorporating the village retaining its former name, was renamed Oslo.
# SENT:  In 1948 Oslo merged with Aker, a municipality which surrounded the capital and which was 27 times larger, thus creating the modern, much larger Oslo municipality.
# SENT:  Oslo is the economic and governmental centre of Norway.
# SENT:  Oslo is a pilot city of the Council of Europe and the European Commission intercultural cities programme.
# SENT:  Oslo is considered a global city and was ranked "Beta World City" in studies carried out by the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network in 2008.
# SENT:  A survey conducted by ECA International in 2011 placed Oslo as the second most expensive city in the world for living expenses after Tokyo.
# SENT:  In 2013 Oslo tied with the Australian city of Melbourne as the fourth most expensive city in the world, according to the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU)'s Worldwide Cost of Living study.
# SENT:  Oslo was ranked as the 24th most liveable city in the world by Monocle magazine.Oslo's population was increasing at record rates during the early 2000s, making it the fastest growing major city in Europe at the time.
# SENT:  The municipality of Oslo has a population of 702,543 as of 31 March 2022.
# SENT:  The city centre is situated at the end of the Oslofjord, from which point the city sprawls out in three distinct "corridors"—inland north-eastwards, and southwards along both sides of the fjord—which gives the urbanized area a shape reminiscent of an upside-down reclining "Y" (on maps, satellite pictures, or from high above the city).
# SENT:  The urban municipality (bykommune) of Oslo and county (fylke) of Oslo are two parts of the same entity, making Oslo the only city in Norway where two administrative levels are integrated.
# SENT:  Of Oslo's total area, 130 km2 (50 sq mi) is built-up and 9.6 km2 (3.7 sq mi) is agricultural.
# SENT:  The open areas within the built-up zone amount to 22 km2 (8.5 sq mi).The city of Oslo was established as a municipality on 3 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt).
# SENT:  The rural municipality of Aker was merged with Oslo on 1 January 1948 (and simultaneously transferred from Akershus county to Oslo county).
# SENT:  Furthermore, Oslo shares several important functions with Akershus county.
# SENT:  The old site east of the Aker river was not abandoned however and the village of Oslo remained as a suburb outside the city gates.
# SENT:  The suburb called Oslo was eventually included in the city proper.
# SENT:  The Old Town is an area within the administrative district Gamle Oslo.
# SENT:  The previous names are reflected in street names like Oslo gate (Oslo street) and Oslo hospital.
# SENT:  The origin of the name Oslo has been the subject of much debate.
# SENT:  Modern linguists generally interpret the original Óslo, Áslo or Ánslo as either "meadow at the foot of a hill" or "meadow consecrated to the Gods", with both considered equally likely.Erroneously, it was once assumed that Oslo meant "the mouth of the Lo river", a supposed previous name for the river Alna.
# SENT:  The name Lo is now believed to be a back-formation arrived at by Friis in support of his [idea about] etymology for Oslo.
# SENT:  Oslo is one of very few cities in Norway, besides Bergen and Tønsberg, that does not have a formal coat of arms, but which uses a city seal instead.
# SENT:  This called for the celebration of Oslo's millennium in 2000.It has been regarded as the capital city since the reign of Haakon V of Norway (1299–1319), the first king to reside permanently in the city.
# SENT:  A century later, Norway was the weaker part in a personal union with Denmark, and Oslo's role was reduced to that of provincial administrative centre, with the monarchs residing in Copenhagen.
# SENT:  The fact that the University of Oslo was founded as late as 1811 had an adverse effect on the development of the nation.Oslo was destroyed several times by fire, and after the fourteenth calamity, in 1624, Christian IV of Denmark and Norway ordered it rebuilt at a new site across the bay, near Akershus Castle and given the name Christiania.
# SENT:  Long before this, Christiania had started to establish its stature as a centre of commerce and culture in Norway.
# SENT:  Under the reign of Olaf III of Norway, Oslo became a cultural centre for Eastern Norway.
# SENT:  On 25 July 1197, Sverre of Norway and his soldiers attacked Oslo from Hovedøya.During the Middle Ages, Oslo reached its heights in the reign of Haakon V of Norway.
# SENT:  He started building Akershus Fortress and was also the first king to reside permanently in the city, which helped to make Oslo the capital of Norway.
# SENT:  The Black Death came to Norway in 1349 and, like other cities in Europe, the city suffered greatly.
# SENT:  In 1814 the former provincial town of Christiania became the capital of the independent Kingdom of Norway, in a personal union with Sweden.
# SENT:  Several important buildings were erected – The Bank of Norway (1828), the Royal Palace (1848), and the Storting (1866).
# SENT:  In the early-20th century, Norwegians argued that a name memorialising a Danish king was inappropriate as the name of the capital of Norway, which became fully independent in 1905.Norway was invaded by Germany on 9 April 1940.
# SENT:  On 31 December 1944, allied bombers missed their intended target and hit a tram, resulting in 79 civilian deaths.During the 2011 Norway attacks, Oslo was hit by a bomb blast that ripped through the Government Quarter, damaging several buildings including the building that houses the Office of the Prime Minister.
# SENT:  Although Eastern Norway has a number of rivers, none of these flow into the ocean at Oslo.
# SENT:  The waterfalls in Akerselva gave power to some of the first modern industry of Norway in the 1840s.
# SENT:  This is the biggest and best-known park in Norway, with a large collection of sculptures by Gustav Vigeland.
# SENT:  The area is surrounded by the sea and is one of the most expensive districts in Norway.
# SENT:  Tøyenbadet is the largest indoor swimming facility in Oslo and one of the few pools in Norway offering a 50-metre main pool.
# SENT:  The architect Carl Frederik Stanley (1769–1805), who was educated in Copenhagen, spent some years in Norway around the turn of the 19th century.
# SENT:  When Christiania was made capital of Norway in 1814, there were practically no buildings suitable for the many new government institutions.
# SENT:  Christian Heinrich Grosch, one of the first architects educated completely within Norway, designed the original building for the Oslo Stock Exchange (1826–1828), the local branch of the Bank of Norway (1828), Christiania Theatre (1836–1837), and the first campus for the University of Oslo (1841–1856).
# SENT:  German architectural influence persisted in Norway, and many wooden buildings followed the principles of Neoclassicism.
# SENT:  The redevelopment of Oslo Airport (by the Aviaplan consortium) at Gardermoen, which opened in 1998, was Norway's largest construction project to date.
# SENT:  Oslo is the capital of Norway, and as such is the seat of Norway's national government.
# SENT:  Constituting both a municipality and a county of Norway, the city of Oslo is represented in the Storting by nineteen members of parliament.
# SENT:  Although Oslo does have the most expensive housing market in Norway, it is comparably cheaper than other cities on the list in that regard.
# SENT:  Oslo hosts 2654 of the largest companies in Norway.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/University_of_Oslo
# SENT:  The University of Oslo (Norwegian: Universitetet i Oslo; Latin: Universitas Osloensis) is a public research university located in Oslo, Norway.
# SENT:  It is the highest ranked and oldest university in Norway.
# SENT:  In 2016, the Times Higher Education World University Rankings listed the university  at 63rd, making it the highest ranked Norwegian university.Originally named the Royal Frederick University, the university was established in 1811 as the de facto Norwegian continuation of Denmark-Norway's common university, the University of Copenhagen, with which it shares many traditions.
# SENT:  It was named for King Frederick VI of Denmark and Norway, and received its current name in 1939.
# SENT:  It has remained Norway's preeminent institution of higher education and the country's only university until 1946.
# SENT:  Its faculties include (Lutheran) theology (with the Lutheran Church of Norway having been Norway's state church since 1536), law, medicine, humanities, mathematics, natural sciences, social sciences, dentistry, and education.
# SENT:  Circumstances then changed dramatically one year into the commencement of the university, as Norway proclaimed independence.
# SENT:  However, independence was somewhat restricted, as Norway was obliged to enter into a legislative union with Sweden based on the outcome of the War of 1814.
# SENT:  Norway retained its own constitution and independent state institutions, although royal power and foreign affairs were shared with Sweden.
# SENT:  In the years leading up to 1940, research was more strongly linked with the growth of the nation, with progress and self-assertion; research was also seen to contribute to Norway's commitment to international academic and cultural development.
# SENT:  Increased research activity during the first half of the 1900s was part of an international development that also included Norway.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:26, WORD1_SENTS:42, WORD2_SENTS:24
# WORDPAIR: Australia Australian
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australia
# SENT:  Australia, officially the Commonwealth of Australia, is a sovereign country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania, and numerous smaller islands.
# SENT:  With an area of 7,617,930 square kilometres (2,941,300 sq mi), Australia is the largest country by area in Oceania and the world's sixth-largest country.
# SENT:  Australia is the oldest, flattest, and driest inhabited continent, with the least fertile soils.
# SENT:  The ancestors of Aboriginal Australians began arriving from south east Asia approximately 65,000 years ago, during the last ice age.
# SENT:  Australia's written history commenced with the European maritime exploration of Australia.
# SENT:  The Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon was the first known European to reach Australia, in 1606.
# SENT:  In 1770, the British explorer James Cook mapped and claimed the east coast of Australia for Great Britain, and the First Fleet of British ships arrived at Sydney in 1788 to establish the penal colony of New South Wales.
# SENT:  Democratic parliaments were gradually established through the 19th century, culminating with a vote for the federation of the six colonies and foundation of the Commonwealth of Australia on 1 January 1901.
# SENT:  Australia has since maintained a stable liberal democratic political system and wealthy market economy.
# SENT:  Politically, Australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy, comprising six states and ten territories.
# SENT:  Australia's population of nearly 26 million is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated on the eastern seaboard.
# SENT:  Australia's demography has been shaped by centuries of immigration: immigrants account for 30% of the country's population, and almost half of Australians have at least one parent born overseas.
# SENT:  Australia's abundant natural resources and well-developed international trade relations are crucial to the country's economy, which generates its income from various sources including services, mining exports, banking, manufacturing, agriculture and international education.Australia is a highly developed country with a high-income economy.
# SENT:  Australia is a regional power, and has the world's thirteenth-highest military expenditure.
# SENT:  Australia ranks amongst the highest in the world for quality of life, democracy, health, education, economic freedom, civil liberties, safety, and political rights, with all its major cities faring exceptionally in global comparative livability surveys.
# SENT:  The name Australia (pronounced  in Australian English) is derived from the Latin Terra Australiscode: lat promoted to code: la  ("southern land"), a name used for a hypothetical continent in the Southern Hemisphere since ancient times.
# SENT:  Several sixteenth century cartographers used the word Australia on maps, but not to identify modern Australia.
# SENT:  When Europeans first began visiting and mapping Australia in the 17th century, the name Terra Australiscode: lat promoted to code: la  was naturally applied to the new territories.Until the early 19th century, Australia was best known as New Holland, a name first applied by the Dutch explorer Abel Tasman in 1644 (as Nieuw-Hollandcode: nld promoted to code: nl ) and subsequently anglicised.
# SENT:  The name Australia was popularised by the explorer Matthew Flinders, who said it was "more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the names of the other great portions of the Earth".
# SENT:  The first time that Australia appears to have been officially used was in April 1817, when Governor Lachlan Macquarie acknowledged the receipt of Flinders' charts of Australia from Lord Bathurst.
# SENT:  The first official published use of the new name came with the publication in 1830 of The Australia Directory by the Hydrographic Office.Colloquial names for Australia include "Oz" and "the Land Down Under" (usually shortened to just "Down Under").
# SENT:  Indigenous Australians comprise two groups - the Aboriginal peoples of the Australian mainland (and surrounding islands including Tasmania), and the Torres Strait Islanders, who are a distinct Melanesian people.
# SENT:  Human habitation of the Australian continent is estimated to have begun 50,000 to 65,000 years ago, with the migration of people by land bridges and short sea crossings from what is now Southeast Asia.
# SENT:  It is uncertain how many waves of immigration may have contributed to these ancestors of modern Aboriginal Australians.
# SENT:  The Madjedbebe rock shelter in Arnhem Land is recognised as the oldest site showing the presence of humans in Australia.
# SENT:  The oldest human remains found are the Lake Mungo remains, which have been dated to around 41,000 years ago.Aboriginal Australian culture is one of the oldest continuous cultures on Earth.
# SENT:  At the time of first European contact, Aboriginal Australians were complex hunter-gatherers with diverse economies and societies and about 250 different language groups.
# SENT:  Aboriginal Australians have an oral culture with spiritual values based on reverence for the land and a belief in the Dreamtime.The Torres Strait Islander people first settled their islands around 4000 years ago.
# SENT:  The northern coasts and waters of Australia were visited sporadically for trade by Makassan fishermen from what is now Indonesia.
# SENT:  The first recorded European sighting of the Australian mainland, and the first recorded European landfall on the Australian continent, are attributed to the Dutch.
# SENT:  The first ship and crew to chart the Australian coast and meet with Aboriginal people was the Duyfken captained by Dutch navigator, Willem Janszoon.
# SENT:  A camp was set up and the Union Flag raised at Sydney Cove, Port Jackson, on 26 January 1788, a date which later became Australia's national day.
# SENT:  The 1808 Rum Rebellion, the only successful armed takeover of government in Australia, instigated a two-year period of military rule.
# SENT:  The British claim extended to the whole Australian continent in 1827 when Major Edmund Lockyer established a settlement on King George Sound (modern-day Albany).
# SENT:  The Swan River Colony (present-day Perth) was established in 1829, evolving into the largest Australian colony by area, Western Australia.
# SENT:  In accordance with population growth, separate colonies were carved from New South Wales: Tasmania in 1825, South Australia in 1836, New Zealand in 1841, Victoria in 1851, and Queensland in 1859.
# SENT:  South Australia was founded as a "free province" — it was never a penal colony.
# SENT:  Western Australia was also founded "free" but later accepted transported convicts, the last of which arrived in 1868, decades after transportation had ceased to the other colonies.In 1823, a Legislative Council nominated by the governor of New South Wales was established, together with a new Supreme Court, thus limiting the powers of colonial governors.
# SENT:  A series of gold rushes beginning in the early 1850s led to an influx of new migrants from China, North America and continental Europe, as well as outbreaks of bushranging and civil unrest; the latter peaked in 1854 when Ballarat miners launched the Eureka Rebellion against gold license fees.From 1886, Australian colonial governments began introducing policies resulting in the removal of many Aboriginal children from their families and communities (referred to as the Stolen Generations).
# SENT:  On 1 January 1901, federation of the colonies was achieved after a decade of planning, constitutional conventions and referendums, resulting in the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia as a nation and the entering into force of the Australian Constitution.After the 1907 Imperial Conference, Australia and several other self-governing British settler colonies were given the status of self-governing "dominions" within the British Empire.
# SENT:  Australia was one of the founding members of the League of Nations in 1920, and subsequently of the United Nations in 1945.
# SENT:  Britain's Statute of Westminster 1931 formally ended most of the constitutional links between Australia and the United Kingdom.
# SENT:  Australia adopted it in 1942, but it was backdated to 1939 to confirm the validity of legislation passed by the Australian Parliament during World War II.The Federal Capital Territory (later renamed the Australian Capital Territory) was formed in 1911 as the location for the future federal capital of Canberra.
# SENT:  The Northern Territory was transferred from the control of the South Australian government to the federal parliament in 1911.
# SENT:  Australia became the colonial ruler of the Territory of Papua (which had initially been annexed by Queensland in 1883) in 1902 and of the Territory of New Guinea (formerly German New Guinea) in 1920.
# SENT:  The two were unified as the Territory of Papua and New Guinea in 1949 and gained independence from Australia in 1975.
# SENT:  In 1914, Australia joined the Allies in fighting the First World War, and took part in many of the major battles fought on the Western Front.
# SENT:  Many Australians regard the defeat of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs) at Gallipoli in 1915 as the nation's "baptism of fire" — its first major military action, with the anniversary of the landing at Anzac Cove commemorated each year on Anzac Day.From 1939 to 1945, Australia joined the Allies in fighting the Second World War.
# SENT:  Australia's armed forces fought in the Pacific, European and Mediterranean and Middle East theatres.
# SENT:  The shock of Britain's defeat in Asia in 1942, followed soon after by the bombing of Darwin and other Japanese attacks on Australian soil, led to a widespread belief in Australia that a Japanese invasion was imminent, and a shift from the United Kingdom to the United States as Australia's principal ally and security partner.
# SENT:  Using the slogan "populate or perish", the nation encouraged a large wave of immigration from across Europe, with such immigrants referred to as "New Australians".A member of the Western Bloc during the Cold War, Australia participated in the Korean War and the Malayan Emergency during the 1950s and the Vietnam War from 1962 to 1972.
# SENT:  During this time, tensions over communist influence in society led to unsuccessful attempts by the Menzies Government to ban the Communist Party of Australia, and a bitter splitting of the Labor Party in 1955.As a result of a 1967 referendum, the Federal Government received a mandate to implement policies to benefit Aboriginal people, and all Indigenous Australians were included in the Census.
# SENT:  This exclusive economic zone does not include the Australian Antarctic Territory.Mainland Australia lies between latitudes 9° and 44° South, and longitudes 112° and 154° East.
# SENT:  At 2,228 m (7,310 ft), Mount Kosciuszko is the highest mountain on the Australian mainland.
# SENT:  Even taller are Mawson Peak (at 2,745 m (9,006 ft)), on the remote Australian external territory of Heard Island, and, in the Australian Antarctic Territory, Mount McClintock and Mount Menzies, at 3,492 m (11,457 ft) and 3,355 m (11,007 ft) respectively.Eastern Australia is marked by the Great Dividing Range, which runs parallel to the coast of Queensland, New South Wales and much of Victoria.
# SENT:  The Western Australian mulga shrublands lie between the interior deserts and Mediterranean-climate Southwest Australia.
# SENT:  Lying on the Indo-Australian Plate, the mainland of Australia is the lowest and most primordial landmass on Earth with a relatively stable geological history.
# SENT:  The Pilbara Craton is one of only two pristine Archaean 3.6–2.7 Ga (billion years ago) crusts identified on the Earth.Having been part of all major supercontinents, the Australian continent began to form after the breakup of Gondwana in the Permian, with the separation of the continental landmass from the African continent and Indian subcontinent.
# SENT:  The Australian continent is moving toward Eurasia at the rate of 6 to 7 centimetres a year.The Australian mainland's continental crust, excluding the thinned margins, has an average thickness of 38 km, with a range in thickness from 24 km to 59 km.
# SENT:  Australia's geology can be divided into several main sections, showcasing that the continent grew from west to east: the Archaean cratonic shields found mostly in the west, Proterozoic fold belts in the centre and Phanerozoic sedimentary basins, metamorphic and igneous rocks in the east.The Australian mainland and Tasmania are situated in the middle of the tectonic plate and have no active volcanoes, but due to passing over the East Australia hotspot, recent volcanism has occurred during the Holocene, in the Newer Volcanics Province of western Victoria and southeastern South Australia.
# SENT:  Volcanism also occurs in the island of New Guinea (considered geologically as part of the Australian continent), and in the Australian external territory of Heard Island and McDonald Islands.
# SENT:  Seismic activity in the Australian mainland and Tasmania is also low, with the greatest number of fatalities having occurred in the 1989 Newcastle earthquake.
# SENT:  Throughout much of the continent, major flooding regularly follows extended periods of drought, flushing out inland river systems, overflowing dams and inundating large inland flood plains, as occurred throughout Eastern Australia in the early 2010s after the 2000s Australian drought.
# SENT:  Australia is also one of 17 megadiverse countries.Australian forests are mostly made up of evergreen species, particularly eucalyptus trees in the less arid regions; wattles replace them as the dominant species in drier regions and deserts.
# SENT:  Among well-known Australian animals are the monotremes (the platypus and echidna); a host of marsupials, including the kangaroo, koala, and wombat, and birds such as the emu and the kookaburra.
# SENT:  The dingo was introduced by Austronesian people who traded with Indigenous Australians around 3000 BCE.
# SENT:  Many animal and plant species became extinct soon after first human settlement, including the Australian megafauna; others have disappeared since European settlement, among them the thylacine.Many of Australia's ecoregions, and the species within those regions, are threatened by human activities and introduced animal, chromistan, fungal and plant species.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australian
# PAGE:  https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australia
# SENT:  Australia, officially the Commonwealth of Australia, is a sovereign country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania, and numerous smaller islands.
# SENT:  The ancestors of Aboriginal Australians began arriving from south east Asia approximately 65,000 years ago, during the last ice age.
# SENT:  Australia's demography has been shaped by centuries of immigration: immigrants account for 30% of the country's population, and almost half of Australians have at least one parent born overseas.
# SENT:  The name Australia (pronounced  in Australian English) is derived from the Latin Terra Australiscode: lat promoted to code: la  ("southern land"), a name used for a hypothetical continent in the Southern Hemisphere since ancient times.
# SENT:  Indigenous Australians comprise two groups - the Aboriginal peoples of the Australian mainland (and surrounding islands including Tasmania), and the Torres Strait Islanders, who are a distinct Melanesian people.
# SENT:  Human habitation of the Australian continent is estimated to have begun 50,000 to 65,000 years ago, with the migration of people by land bridges and short sea crossings from what is now Southeast Asia.
# SENT:  It is uncertain how many waves of immigration may have contributed to these ancestors of modern Aboriginal Australians.
# SENT:  The oldest human remains found are the Lake Mungo remains, which have been dated to around 41,000 years ago.Aboriginal Australian culture is one of the oldest continuous cultures on Earth.
# SENT:  At the time of first European contact, Aboriginal Australians were complex hunter-gatherers with diverse economies and societies and about 250 different language groups.
# SENT:  Aboriginal Australians have an oral culture with spiritual values based on reverence for the land and a belief in the Dreamtime.The Torres Strait Islander people first settled their islands around 4000 years ago.
# SENT:  The first recorded European sighting of the Australian mainland, and the first recorded European landfall on the Australian continent, are attributed to the Dutch.
# SENT:  The first ship and crew to chart the Australian coast and meet with Aboriginal people was the Duyfken captained by Dutch navigator, Willem Janszoon.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:50, WORD1_SENTS:30, WORD2_SENTS:0
# WORDPAIR: Japan Japanese
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_Wikipedia
# SENT:  The Japanese Wikipedia (ウィキペディア日本語版, Wikipedia Nihongoban, literally "Wikipedia: Japanese-language version") is the Japanese-language edition of Wikipedia, a free, open-source online encyclopedia.
# SENT:  In March 2001, three non-English editions of Wikipedia were created, namely, the German, Catalan and Japanese Wikipedias.
# SENT:  The original site address of the Japanese Wikipedia was http://nihongo.wikipedia.com and all pages were written in the Latin alphabet or romaji, as the software did not work with Japanese characters at the time.
# SENT:  The home page also showed an early attempt at creating a vertical text.The first article was named "Nihongo no Funimekusu" (meaning "Phonemics of the Japanese language").
# SENT:  In September 2004, the Japanese Wikipedia was awarded the "2004 Web Creation Award Web-Person Special Prize" from the Japan Advertisers Association.
# SENT:  This award, normally given to individuals for great contributions to the Web in Japanese, was accepted by a long-standing contributor on behalf of the project.
# SENT:  The Japanese Wikipedia is different from the English Wikipedia in a number of ways.
# SENT:  An edit is kept only if it is legal under both Japanese and United States laws, to account for the fact that the vast majority of contributors live in Japan.
# SENT:  Wikipedians in Japanese Wikipedia generally do not create independent lists of volumes of manga, or episodes of anime, however there are exceptions, e.g.
# SENT:  The Japanese Wikipedia has the lowest number of administrators per active users (only 0.27%).
# SENT:  Perhaps because of this, as of September 2005 the Japanese Wikipedia had the second-highest number of articles protected for over two weeks, after the German Wikipedia.
# SENT:  Articles on sensitive topics, such as Japanese war crimes and current territorial disputes, are almost always under lengthy protection.
# SENT:  The Japanese Wikipedia is Japan-centered, due to the fact that the overwhelming majority of users are Japanese people, nearly all living in Japan.
# SENT:  When referring to places outside Japan they are often called "overseas", and references to Japanese perspective on articles are common.
# SENT:  Articles will be deleted if they contain the names of private citizens, unless they are public figures (under section B-2 of Japanese deletion policy).
# SENT:  For example, an article about Shosei Koda, a Japanese citizen kidnapped in Iraq, does not refer to him by name, but former Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda's name may be mentioned due to his public position.
# SENT:  Convicted criminals and their victims are considered private citizens, even if the case was extensively covered in Japanese media, and their names may not be published until their death.
# SENT:  The Japanese edition of the English policy Ignore All Rules (directly linked to one of Five Pillars) is neither a policy nor a guideline.
# SENT:  The Japanese edition of the English Wikipedia how-to guide How to write a plot summary is a formal guideline.
# SENT:  The Japanese edition of the English Wikipedia page Handling trivia (which is an explanatory supplement to the Manual of Style guideline on trivia sections) is a formal guideline as well.
# SENT:  The Japanese edition of the English banning policy is not a policy, for lack of the Arbitration Committee.
# SENT:  There is no local chapter of the Wikimedia Foundation in Japan.
# SENT:  Andrew Lih has written that influence from 2channel (2ch) resulted in many Japanese Wikipedia editors being unregistered and anonymous.
# SENT:  Because of the lack of registered users, Japanese Wikipedia editors as a whole interact less with the international Wikipedia community and the Wikimedia Foundation than editors of other Wikipedias do.
# SENT:  Lih also wrote that Japanese Wikipedia users are less likely to engage in edit wars than users on Wikipedias of Western languages, and typically they would instead make alternative drafts of articles on their own userspaces.Jimmy Wales has pointed out at a conference that the Japanese Wikipedia is significantly more dominated by articles about pop culture than other Wikipedia projects, and according to one of his slides, "barely 20 percent" of the articles on the Japanese Wikipedia were about anything else.
# SENT:  The Japanese Wikipedia is known to have relatively few moderators as of early March 2010.Nobuo Ikeda, a known public policy academic and media critic in Japan, has suggested an ongoing 2channel-ization phenomenon on the Japanese Wikipedia.
# SENT:  He also remarks on the "emotional-outlet"/"get rid of stress" aspect of Japanese internet culture where 90% of blogs are anonymous, a complete opposite of the U.S. where 80% of blogs are expressed under one's real name.
# SENT:  Ikeda's arguments are not the only sources hinting cultural correlation, influence, overlapping users from 2channel.In 2006 Kizu Naoko (木津 尚子), a Japanese Wikipedian, stated that on the Japanese Wikipedia most users start out as page editors and uploaders of images, and that the majority of people continue to serve in those roles.
# SENT:  "[Encyclopedia] Wikipedia Part dddd edition [Wikipedia]") related to the Japanese Wikipedia on 2channel.
# SENT:  In these textboards, the Japanese Wikipedia community informally discuss with each other anonymously.
# SENT:  On Twitter, they use accounts associated with their username and "#jawp" for mentioning to Japanese Wikipedia.
# SENT:  Attention was brought to the Japanese Wikipedia article about Kozo Iizuka (ja:飯塚幸三), which describes his accomplishments in detail, but makes no mention of how he killed a woman and her young daughter in the Higashi-Ikebukuro runaway car accident that made him a household name in Japan.
# SENT:  An administrator applied protection to the article and later explained that the Japanese Wikipedia community takes legal risks arising from potential privacy violations very seriously as a result of there being no local chapter to assist them in lawsuits.In 2021, an article in the magazine Slate written by Yumiko Sato found that the Japanese Wikipedia was engaging in historical revisionism and whitewashing on a number of articles, especially the Japanese Wikipedia article for the Battle of Hong Kong (ja:香港の戦い), the Japanese Wikipedia article for Comfort women (ja:日本の慰安婦), the Japanese Wikipedia article for the Nanjing Massacre (ja:南京事件), and the Japanese Wikipedia article for Unit 731 (ja:731部隊).
# SENT:  A Japanese Wikipedia editor and Shakespeare specialist Sae Kitamura responded to Sato's criticisms, arguing that much of her criticisms stem from her lack of understanding of the Japanese Wikipedia policies, as well as confusion of Wikipedia jargons such as han hogo (semi-protection) and zen hogo (full protection).On July 19, 2021, Keigo Oyamada as Cornelius, the composer of the 2020 Tokyo Olympic games opening ceremony, resigned after it emerged that he had bullied classmates with disabilities when he was a student.
# SENT:  Flash, a Japanese weekly magazine, criticized the Japanese Wikipedia for repeatedly removing over multiple years the addition of information about Oyamada and his history of bullying, despite this information having already been reported on in reliable sources in the 1990s in another magazine's interview report.
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_language
# SENT:  Japanese (日本語, Nihongo, [ɲihoŋɡo] (listen)) is spoken as a native language by about 128 million people, primarily Japanese people and primarily in Japan, the only country where it is the national language.
# SENT:  Japanese belongs to the Japonic or Japanese-Ryukyuan language family.
# SENT:  Little is known of the language's prehistory, or when it first appeared in Japan.
# SENT:  Chinese documents from the 3rd century AD recorded a few Japanese words, but substantial Old Japanese texts did not appear until the 8th century.
# SENT:  From the Heian period (794–1185), extensive waves of Sino-Japanese vocabulary entered the language, affecting the phonology of Early Middle Japanese.
# SENT:  Late Middle Japanese (1185–1600) saw extensive grammatical changes and the first appearance of European loanwords.
# SENT:  The basis of the standard dialect moved from the Kansai region to the Edo region (modern Tokyo) in the Early Modern Japanese period (early 17th century–mid 19th century).
# SENT:  Following the end of Japan's self-imposed isolation in 1853, the flow of loanwords from European languages increased significantly, and words from English roots have proliferated.
# SENT:  Japanese is an agglutinative, mora-timed language with relatively simple phonotactics, a pure vowel system, phonemic vowel and consonant length, and a lexically significant pitch-accent.
# SENT:  Japanese adjectives are also conjugated.
# SENT:  Japanese has a complex system of honorifics, with verb forms and vocabulary to indicate the relative status of the speaker, the listener, and persons mentioned.
# SENT:  The Japanese writing system combines Chinese characters, known as kanji (漢字, 'Han characters'), with two unique syllabaries (or moraic scripts) derived by the Japanese from the more complex Chinese characters: hiragana (ひらがな or 平仮名, 'simple characters') and katakana (カタカナ or 片仮名, 'partial characters').
# SENT:  Latin script (rōmaji ローマ字) is also used in a limited fashion (such as for imported acronyms) in Japanese writing.
# SENT:  Proto-Japonic, the common ancestor of the Japanese and Ryukyuan languages, is thought to have been brought to Japan by settlers coming from the Korean peninsula sometime in the early- to mid-4th century BC (the Yayoi period), replacing the languages of the original Jōmon inhabitants, including the ancestor of the modern Ainu language.
# SENT:  Because writing had yet to be introduced from China, there is no direct evidence, and anything that can be discerned about this period must be based on internal reconstruction from Old Japanese, or comparison with the Ryukyuan languages and Japanese dialects.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:50, WORD1_SENTS:3, WORD2_SENTS:0
# WORDPAIR: France Europe
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/France
# SENT:  France (French: [fʁɑ̃s] ), officially the French Republic (French: République française [ʁepyblik frɑ̃sɛz]), is a country primarily located in Western Europe.
# SENT:  Its eighteen integral regions (five of which are overseas) span a combined area of 643,801 km2 (248,573 sq mi) and had a total population of over 68 million as of January 2023.France is a unitary semi-presidential republic with its capital in Paris, the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre; other major urban areas include Marseille, Lyon, Toulouse, Lille, Bordeaux, and Nice.
# SENT:  Inhabited since the Palaeolithic era, the territory of Metropolitan France was settled by Celtic tribes known as Gauls during the Iron Age.
# SENT:  The Treaty of Verdun of 843 partitioned the empire, with West Francia becoming the Kingdom of France in 987.
# SENT:  In the High Middle Ages, France was a powerful but highly decentralised feudal kingdom.
# SENT:  Philip II successfully strengthened royal power and defeated his rivals to double the size of the crown lands; by the end of his reign, France had emerged as the most powerful state in Europe.
# SENT:  From the mid-14th to the mid-15th century, France was plunged into a series of dynastic conflicts involving England, collectively known as the Hundred Years' War, and a distinct French identity emerged as a result.
# SENT:  France again emerged as Europe's dominant power in the 17th century under Louis XIV following the Thirty Years' War.
# SENT:  France reached its political and military zenith in the early 19th century under Napoleon Bonaparte, subjugating much of continental Europe and establishing the First French Empire.
# SENT:  The French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars shaped the course of European and world history.
# SENT:  The collapse of the empire initiated a period of relative decline, in which France endured a tumultuous succession of governments until the founding of the French Third Republic during the Franco-Prussian War in 1870.
# SENT:  France was one of the major participants of World War I, from which it emerged victorious at a great human and economic cost.
# SENT:  Algeria and most French colonies became independent in the 1960s, with the majority retaining close economic and military ties with France.
# SENT:  France retains its centuries-long status as a global centre of art, science and philosophy.
# SENT:  France is a developed country ranked 28th in the Human Development Index, with the world's seventh-largest economy by nominal GDP and tenth-largest by PPP; in terms of aggregate household wealth, it ranks fourth in the world.
# SENT:  France performs well in international rankings of education, health care, and life expectancy.
# SENT:  France is a founding and leading member of the European Union and the Eurozone, as well as a key member of the Group of Seven, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and Francophonie.
# SENT:  Originally applied to the whole Frankish Empire, the name France comes from the Latin Francia, or "realm of the Franks".
# SENT:  Modern France is still named today Francia in Italian and Spanish, while Frankreich in German, Frankrijk in Dutch and Frankrike in Swedish all mean "Land/realm of the Franks".
# SENT:  It is traditionally derived from the Proto-Germanic word *frankōn, which translates as "javelin" or "lance" (the throwing axe of the Franks was known as the francisca), although these weapons may have been named because of their use by the Franks, not the other way around.In English, 'France' is pronounced  FRANSS in American English and  FRAHNSS or  FRANSS in British English.
# SENT:  The oldest traces of human life in what is now France date from approximately 1.8 million years ago.
# SENT:  France has a large number of decorated caves from the Upper Paleolithic era, including one of the most famous and best-preserved, Lascaux (approximately 18,000 BC).
# SENT:  At the end of the last glacial period (10,000 BC), the climate became milder; from approximately 7,000 BC, this part of Western Europe entered the Neolithic era and its inhabitants became sedentary.
# SENT:  France has numerous megalithic sites from the Neolithic period, including the exceptionally dense Carnac stones site (approximately 3,300 BC).
# SENT:  This makes it France's oldest city.
# SENT:  At the same time, some Gallic Celtic tribes penetrated parts of Eastern and Northern France, gradually spreading through the rest of the country between the 5th and 3rd century BC.
# SENT:  The borders of modern France roughly correspond to ancient Gaul, which was inhabited by Celtic Gauls.
# SENT:  Clovis I was the first Germanic conqueror after the fall of the Roman Empire to convert to Catholic Christianity, rather than Arianism; thus France was given the title "Eldest daughter of the Church" (French: La fille aînée de l'Église) by the papacy, and French kings would be called "the Most Christian Kings of France" (Rex Christianissimus).
# SENT:  Pepin's son, Charlemagne, reunited the Frankish kingdoms and built a vast empire across Western and Central Europe.
# SENT:  West Francia approximated the area occupied by and was the precursor to, modern France.During the 9th and 10th centuries, continually threatened by Viking invasions, France became a very decentralised state: the nobility's titles and lands became hereditary, and the authority of the king became more religious than secular and thus was less effective and constantly challenged by powerful noblemen.
# SENT:  Thus was established feudalism in France.
# SENT:  For example, after the Battle of Hastings in 1066, William the Conqueror added "King of England" to his titles, becoming both the vassal to (as Duke of Normandy) and the equal of (as king of England) the king of France, creating recurring tensions.
# SENT:  The Carolingian dynasty ruled France until 987, when Hugh Capet, Duke of France and Count of Paris, was crowned King of the Franks.
# SENT:  His descendants—the Capetians, the House of Valois and the House of Bourbon—progressively unified the country through wars and dynastic inheritance into the Kingdom of France, which was fully declared in 1190 by Philip II of France (Philippe Auguste).
# SENT:  Later kings would expand their directly possessed domaine royal to cover over half of modern continental France by the 15th century, including most of the north, centre and west of France.
# SENT:  French knights made up the bulk of the steady flow of reinforcements throughout the two-hundred-year span of the Crusades, in such a fashion that the Arabs uniformly referred to the crusaders as Franj caring little whether they came from France.
# SENT:  The latter, in particular, held numerous properties throughout France and by the 13th century were the principal bankers for the French crown, until Philip IV annihilated the order in 1307.
# SENT:  The Albigensian Crusade was launched in 1209 to eliminate the heretical Cathars in the southwestern area of modern-day France.
# SENT:  In the end, the Cathars were exterminated and the autonomous County of Toulouse was annexed into the crown lands of France.
# SENT:  From the 11th century, the House of Plantagenet, the rulers of the County of Anjou, succeeded in establishing its dominion over the surrounding provinces of Maine and Touraine, then progressively built an "empire" that spanned from England to the Pyrenees and covering half of modern France.
# SENT:  Tensions between the kingdom of France and the Plantagenet empire would last a hundred years, until Philip II of France conquered, between 1202 and 1214, most of the continental possessions of the empire, leaving England and Aquitaine to the Plantagenets.
# SENT:  Under Salic law the crown of France could not pass to a woman nor could the line of kingship pass through the female line.
# SENT:  However Philip's seat on the throne was contested by Edward III of England in 1337, and England and France entered the off-and-on Hundred Years' War.
# SENT:  The exact boundaries changed greatly with time, but landholdings inside France by the English Kings remained extensive for decades.
# SENT:  Like the rest of Europe, France was struck by the Black Death due to which half of the 17 million population of France died.
# SENT:  The French Renaissance saw spectacular cultural development and the first standardisation of the French language, which would become the official language of France and the language of Europe's aristocracy.
# SENT:  It also saw a long set of wars, known as the Italian Wars, between France and the House of Habsburg.
# SENT:  French explorers, such as Jacques Cartier or Samuel de Champlain, claimed lands in the Americas for France, paving the way for the expansion of the French colonial empire.
# SENT:  The rise of Protestantism in Europe led France to a civil war known as the French Wars of Religion, where, in the most notorious incident, thousands of Huguenots were murdered in the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572.
# SENT:  Spanish troops, the terror of Western Europe, assisted the Catholic side during the Wars of Religion in 1589–1594, and invaded northern France in 1597; after some skirmishing in the 1620s and 1630s, Spain and France returned to all-out war between 1635 and 1659.
# SENT:  The war cost France 300,000 casualties.Under Louis XIII,  Cardinal Richelieu promoted the centralisation of the state and reinforced royal power by disarming domestic power holders in the 1620s.
# SENT:  By the end of the 1620s, Richelieu established "the royal monopoly of force" as the doctrine.From the 16th to the 19th century, France was responsible for 11% of the transatlantic slave trade, second only to Great Britain during the 18th century.
# SENT:  By the mid-18th century, Nantes had become the primary port involved.During Louis XIV's minority and the regency of Queen Anne and Cardinal Mazarin, a period of trouble known as the Fronde occurred in France.
# SENT:  Remembered for numerous wars, the so-called Sun King made France the leading European power.
# SENT:  France became the most populous country in Europe and had tremendous influence over European politics, economy, and culture.
# SENT:  Its European territory kept growing, however, with notable acquisitions such as Lorraine (1766) and Corsica (1770).
# SENT:  As a continuation of the wars sparked by the European monarchies against the French Republic, changing sets of European Coalitions declared wars on Napoleon's Empire.
# SENT:  His armies conquered most of continental Europe with swift victories such as the battles of Jena-Auerstadt or Austerlitz.
# SENT:  After the catastrophic Russian campaign, and the ensuing uprising of European monarchies against his rule, Napoleon was defeated and the Bourbon monarchy restored.
# SENT:  Only months later, France faced another anti-colonialist conflict in Algeria, then treated as an integral part of France and home to over one million European settlers.
# SENT:  He restored cordial Franco-German relations to create a European counterweight between the American and Soviet spheres of influence.
# SENT:  However, he opposed any development of a supranational Europe, favouring a Europe of sovereign nations.
# SENT:  In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, France has been at the forefront of the development of a supranational European Union, notably by signing the Maastricht Treaty (which created the European Union) in 1992, establishing the Eurozone in 1999 and signing the Lisbon Treaty in 2007.
# SENT:  These have been mostly male foreign workers from European Catholic countries who generally returned home when not employed.
# SENT:  They were encouraged to retain their distinctive cultures and traditions and required merely to integrate.Since the 1995 Paris Métro and RER bombings, France has been sporadically targeted by Islamist organisations, notably the Charlie Hebdo attack in January 2015 which provoked the largest public rallies in French history, gathering 4.4 million people, the November 2015 Paris attacks which resulted in 130 deaths, the deadliest attack on French soil since World War II and the deadliest in the European Union since the Madrid train bombings in 2004, as well as the 2016 Nice truck attack, which caused 87 deaths during Bastille Day celebrations.
# SENT:  The vast majority of France's territory and population is situated in Western Europe and is called Metropolitan France, to distinguish it from the country's various overseas polities.
# SENT:  Metropolitan France is situated mostly between latitudes 41° and 51° N, and longitudes 6° W and 10° E, on the western edge of Europe, and thus lies within the northern temperate zone.
# SENT:  Metropolitan France covers 551,500 square kilometres (212,935 sq mi), the largest among European Union members.
# SENT:  At 4,810.45 metres (15,782 ft) above sea level, Mont Blanc, located in the Alps on the French and Italian border, is the highest point in Western Europe.
# SENT:  The Garonne meets the Dordogne just after Bordeaux, forming the Gironde estuary, the largest estuary in Western Europe which after approximately 100 kilometres (62 mi) empties into the Atlantic Ocean.
# SENT:  According to the 2020 Environmental Performance Index conducted by Yale and Columbia, France was the fifth most environmentally conscious country in the world (behind the United Kingdom).Like all European Union state members, France agreed to cut carbon emissions by at least 20% of 1990 levels by 2020, compared to the United States' plan to reduce emissions by 4% of 1990 levels.
# SENT:  However, the plan was abandoned due to fears of burdening French businesses.Forests account for 31 percent of France's land area—the fourth-highest proportion in Europe—representing an increase of 7 percent since 1990.
# SENT:  French forests are some of the most diverse in Europe, comprising more than 140 species of trees.
# SENT:  The French Republic is divided into 18 regions (located in Europe and overseas), five overseas collectivities, one overseas territory, one special collectivity – New Caledonia and one uninhabited island directly under the authority of the Minister of Overseas France – Clipperton.
# SENT:  Among the 101 French departments, five (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, and Réunion) are in overseas regions (ROMs) that are simultaneously overseas departments (DOMs), enjoying the same status as metropolitan departments and are thereby included in the European Union.
# SENT:  Overseas collectivities and territories form part of the French Republic, but do not form part of the European Union or its fiscal area (except for St. Bartelemy, which seceded from Guadeloupe in 2007).
# SENT:  Since 2020, Europe Ecology – The Greens have performed well in mayoral elections in major cities while on a national level, an alliance of Left parties (the NUPES) was the second-largest voting block elected to the lower house in 2022.The electorate is constitutionally empowered to vote on amendments passed by the Parliament and bills submitted by the president.
# SENT:  It also hosts the headquarters of several international organisations, including the OECD, UNESCO, Interpol, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, and the OIF.Postwar French foreign policy has been largely shaped by membership in the European Union, of which it was a founding member.
# SENT:  In the 1960s, France sought to exclude the British from the European unification process, seeking to build its standing in continental Europe.
# SENT:  According to a 2018 study by Crédit Suisse, the French Armed Forces are ranked as the world's sixth-most powerful military, and the second most powerful in Europe after Russia.
# SENT:  France is actively investing in European joint projects such as the Eurocopter Tiger, multipurpose frigates, the UCAV demonstrator nEUROn and the Airbus A400M.
# SENT:  For roughly two centuries, the French economy has consistently ranked among the ten largest globally; it is currently the world's ninth-largest by purchasing power parity, the seventh-largest by nominal GDP, and the second-largest in the European Union by both metrics.
# SENT:  France is the third-biggest manufacturing country in Europe, behind Germany and Italy, and ranks eighth in the world by share of global manufacturing output, at 1.9 percent.
# SENT:  Less than 2 percent of GDP is generated by the primary sector, namely agriculture; however, France's agricultural sector is among the largest in value and leads the EU in terms of overall production.In 2018, France was the fifth-largest trading nation in the world and the second-largest in Europe, with the value of exports representing over a fifth of GDP.
# SENT:  Its membership in the Eurozone and the broader European Single Market facilitates access to capital, goods, services, and skilled labour.
# SENT:  Despite protectionist policies over certain industries, particularly in agriculture, France has generally played a leading role in fostering free trade and commercial integration in Europe to enhance its economy.
# SENT:  In 2019, it ranked first in Europe and 13th in the world in foreign direct investment, with European countries and the United States being leading sources.
# SENT:  The Paris region has the highest concentration of multinational firms in Europe.Under the doctrine of Dirigisme, the government historically played a major role in the economy; policies such as indicative planning and nationalisation are credited for contributing to three decades of unprecedented postwar economic growth known as Trente Glorieuses.
# SENT:  France is Europe's second-largest spender in research and development, at over 2 percent of GDP; globally, it ranks 12th.Financial services, banking, and insurance are important part of the economy.
# SENT:  Euronext Paris, the French branch of NYSE Euronext, is Europe's second-largest stock exchange market, behind the London Stock Exchange.
# SENT:  The country's diverse climate, extensive arable land, modern farming technology, and EU subsidies have made it Europe's leading agricultural producer and exporter; it accounts for one-fifth of the EU's agricultural production, including over one-third of its oilseeds, cereals, and wine.
# BOTH_WORD_SENTS:26, WORD1_SENTS:41, WORD2_SENTS:24
# WORDPAIR: Iran Rial
# PAGE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iranian_rial
# SENT:  The rial (Persian: ریال ایران, romanized: riyâl-è Irân; sign: ریال ; abbreviation: Rl (singular) and Rls (plural) or IR in Latin; ISO code: IRR) is the official currency of Iran.
# SENT:  There is no official symbol for the currency but the Iranian standard ISIRI 820 defined a symbol for use on typewriters (mentioning that it is an invention of the standards committee itself) and the two Iranian standards ISIRI 2900 and ISIRI 3342 define a character code to be used for it.
# SENT:  