athens municipality is the largest in population size in greece. cinema cinema first appeared in greece in 1896 but the first actual cine theatre was opened in 1907 in athens. athens ath inz greek αθήνα romanized athína [aˈθina] listen ancient greek ἀθῆναι romanized athênai pl. [atʰɛ̂ːnai̯] is a coastal city in the mediterranean and is both the capital and largest city of greece. classical athens was a powerful city state. government and politics athens became the capital of greece in 1834 following nafplion which was the provisional capital from 1829. athens is home to two unesco world heritage sites the acropolis of athens and the medieval daphni monastery. greece attracted 26. athens joined the unesco global network of learning cities in 2016. the port of piraeus is the largest port in greece and one of the largest in europe. cecrops accepted this gift and declared athena the patron goddess of athens. other forms of song popular today in greece are elafrolaika entechno dimotika and skyladika. athens has been continuously inhabited for at least 5 000 years 3000 bc . greece has the longest coastline on the mediterranean basin featuring thousands of islands. later under rome athens was given the status of a free city because of its widely admired schools. subsequently the junta collapsed in 1974 and greece returned to democratic governance which has continued to this day. after the fourth crusade the duchy of athens was established. greece has a unique cultural heritage large tourism industry and prominent shipping sector. in 1896 athens hosted the first modern olympic games. lack of political unity within greece resulted in frequent conflict between greek states. in 2004 athens hosted the 2004 summer olympics. macedon s defeat at the battle of pydna in 168 bc signalled the end of antigonid power in greece. the cephissus river the ilisos and the eridanos stream are the historical rivers of athens. paul were mostly greek speaking though generally not from greece itself. as may 2022 the crime index from numbeo places athens at 56. john of patmos attest to the importance of churches in greece in early christianity. 8 in in central athens. however this too fell to the ottomans in 1460 completing the ottoman conquest of mainland greece. and with even the acropolis of athens completely covered with snow. the nature of ottoman administration of greece varied though it was invariably arbitrary and often harsh. 4 °f which was recorded in the elefsina and tatoi suburbs of athens on 10 july 1977. greece also accepted the imposition of an international financial control authority to pay off the country s debtors. furthermore metropolitan athens has experienced temperatures of 47. another political issue in 19th century greece was uniquely greek the language question. omonoia omonoia square greek πλατεία ομονοίας is the oldest square in athens. although a dictatorship greece remained on good terms with britain and was not allied with the axis. metaxourgeio greek μεταξουργείο is a neighborhood of athens. since the battle of salamis greece had not achieved the greatness and the glory which today holds. the national garden of athens was completed in 1840 and is a green refuge of 15. in 1952 greece joined nato reinforcing its membership in the western bloc of the cold war. tehran persian تهران tehrân [tehˈɾɒːn] listen is the capital of iran and the largest city in tehran province. eventually qajar king agha mohammad khan chose tehran as the capital of iran in 1786. tehran international tower is the tallest skyscraper in iran. roosevelt and winston churchill—issued the tehran declaration to guarantee the post war independence and boundaries of iran. tehran times iran daily and financial tribune are among english language newspapers based in iran. modern ray was absorbed into the metropolitan area of greater tehran. classical era tehran is in the historical media region of old persian 𐎶𐎠𐎭 māda in northwestern iran. the capital has been moved several times throughout history however and tehran became the 32nd capital of persia. economy tehran is the economic centre of iran. a 2016 survey of 230 cities across the globe by mercer ranked tehran 203rd for quality of life. but prior to the 1979 revolution many foreign companies were active in iran. according to the global destinations cities index in 2016 tehran is among the top ten fastest growing destinations. iran mall is the largest mall in the world in area. etymology various theories on the origin of the name tehran have been put forward. this was the first trolleybus system in iran. history archaeological remains from the ancient city of ray suggest that settlement in tehran dates back over 6 000 years. bicycle bdood is a dockless bike sharing company in iran. in the ninth century tehran was a well known village but less so than the city of rhages flourishing nearby. tehran s birds garden is the largest bird park in iran. others escaped to tehran. education tehran is the largest and most important educational center in iran. english traveler thomas herbert entered tehran in 1627 and mentioned it as tyroan. a photographic project focusing on neglected pieces of architecture in downtown tehran iran. the first development plan of tehran in 1855 emphasized traditional spatial structure. iran has an estimated population of 86. tehran was 19. arab muslims conquered the empire in the seventh century ad which led to the islamization of iran. in 1943 tehran was the site of the tehran conference attended by u. today both iran and persia are used in cultural contexts while iran remains mandatory in official state contexts. throughout the 1960s and 1970s tehran developed rapidly under mohammad reza shah. historical and cultural usage of the word iran is not restricted to the modern state proper. modern buildings altered the face of tehran and ambitious projects were planned for the following decades. pronunciation the persian pronunciation of iran is [ʔiːˈɾɒːn]. during the iran–iraq war in 1980 to 1988 tehran was repeatedly targeted by airstrikes and scud missile attacks. following the premature death of alexander iran came under the control of the hellenistic seleucid empire. geography location and subdivisions the metropolis of tehran is divided into 22 municipal districts each with its own administrative center. reza shah became the new prime minister of iran and was declared the new monarch in 1925. although administratively separate the cities of ray and shemiran are often considered part of greater tehran. 1951–1978 mosaddegh mohammad reza pahlavi in 1951 mohammad mosaddegh was appointed as the prime minister of pahlavi iran. the main direction of the prevailing wind in tehran is northwest to southeast. after holding a referendum iran officially became an islamic republic in april 1979. athens municipality is the largest in population size in greece. cinema cinema first appeared in greece in 1896 but the first actual cine theatre was opened in 1907 in athens. athens ath inz greek αθήνα romanized athína [aˈθina] listen ancient greek ἀθῆναι romanized athênai pl.the rial (persian: ریال ایران, romanized: riyâl-è irân; sign: ریال ; abbreviation: rl (singular) and rls (plural) or ir in latin; iso code: irr) is the official currency of iran. a proposal has been agreed to by the iranian parliament to drop four zeros, by replacing the rial with a new currency called the toman, the name of a previous iranian currency, at the rate of 1,000 toman = 10,000 rials. in 1825, the rial ceased to be issued, with the qiran subdivided into 20 shahi or 1,000 dinars and was worth one-tenth of a toman, being issued as part of a decimal system. the rial replaced the qiran at par in 1932, subdivided into 100 new dinars. prior to decimalisation in 1932, these coins and currencies were used, and some of these terms still have wide usage in iranian languages and proverbs:\n\nvalue\nin 1932, the rial was pegged to sterling at a rate of £1 stg = rls 59. although described as an (interbank) "market rate", the value of the iranian rial is tightly controlled by the central bank. according to the wall street journal and dealers, the iranian government was selling us$250 million daily to keep the rial exchange rate against the us dollar between rls 9,700 and rls 9,900 in 2009. as of june 2020, the iranian rial has fallen almost five-fold since the beginning of 2018 and contributing to the record inflation. the value of rial has dropped by 29% since the nationwide protests that began on september 16, following the death of mahsa amini, a 22 year old kurdish-iranian woman in police custody. pre-unification, rials per us dollar:market: 8,200 (2002); 8,050 (2001); 8,350 (2000)preferred: 6,906 (2002); 1,753 (2001); 1,764 (2000)\n\nexchange rate system\nuntil 2002, iran\'s exchange rate system was based on a multi-layered system, where state and para-state enterprises benefited from the "preferred or official rate" (rls 1,750 for us$1) while the private sector paid the "market rate" (rls 8,000 for us$1), hence creating an unequal competition environment. in 2008, an official at the central bank of iran said the bank plans to slash four zeros off the rial and rename it the toman. in july 2019, the iranian government approved a bill to change the national currency from the rial to the toman with one toman equalling rls 10, a process which will reportedly cost $160 million. central intelligence agency (cia) plan had been authorized to manipulate the iranian rial in order to destabilize the country, though the details and outcome of said plan are not known. in 2013, talking about the sanctions against iran, us senator carl levin said that "iranian rial banknotes are printed in europe". printing\nsecurity paper mill (called takab) is a paper mill and a subsidiary of the central bank of iran responsible for production of security papers, including those of the iranian rial banknotes located in the city of amol. [atʰɛ̂ːnai̯] is a coastal city in the mediterranean and is both the capital and largest city of greece. classical athens was a powerful city state. government and politics athens became the capital of greece in 1834 following nafplion which was the provisional capital from 1829. athens is home to two unesco world heritage sites the acropolis of athens and the medieval daphni monastery. greece attracted 26. athens joined the unesco global network of learning cities in 2016. the port of piraeus is the largest port in greece and one of the largest in europe. cecrops accepted this gift and declared athena the patron goddess of athens. other forms of song popular today in greece are elafrolaika entechno dimotika and skyladika. athens has been continuously inhabited for at least 5 000 years 3000 bc . greece has the longest coastline on the mediterranean basin featuring thousands of islands. later under rome athens was given the status of a free city because of its widely admired schools. subsequently the junta collapsed in 1974 and greece returned to democratic governance which has continued to this day. after the fourth crusade the duchy of athens was established. greece has a unique cultural heritage large tourism industry and prominent shipping sector. in 1896 athens hosted the first modern olympic games. lack of political unity within greece resulted in frequent conflict between greek states. in 2004 athens hosted the 2004 summer olympics. macedon s defeat at the battle of pydna in 168 bc signalled the end of antigonid power in greece. the cephissus river the ilisos and the eridanos stream are the historical rivers of athens. paul were mostly greek speaking though generally not from greece itself. as may 2022 the crime index from numbeo places athens at 56. john of patmos attest to the importance of churches in greece in early christianity. 8 in in central athens. however this too fell to the ottomans in 1460 completing the ottoman conquest of mainland greece. and with even the acropolis of athens completely covered with snow. the nature of ottoman administration of greece varied though it was invariably arbitrary and often harsh. 4 °f which was recorded in the elefsina and tatoi suburbs of athens on 10 july 1977. greece also accepted the imposition of an international financial control authority to pay off the country s debtors. furthermore metropolitan athens has experienced temperatures of 47. another political issue in 19th century greece was uniquely greek the language question. omonoia omonoia square greek πλατεία ομονοίας is the oldest square in athens. although a dictatorship greece remained on good terms with britain and was not allied with the axis. metaxourgeio greek μεταξουργείο is a neighborhood of athens. since the battle of salamis greece had not achieved the greatness and the glory which today holds. the national garden of athens was completed in 1840 and is a green refuge of 15. in 1952 greece joined nato reinforcing its membership in the western bloc of the cold war. by the 11th century london was clearly the largest town in england. london became the main north sea port with migrants arriving from england and abroad. the red double decker buses in london have become a symbol of england. london is the most visited city in europe and has the busiest city airport system in the world. 4% of the population of the united kingdom and over 16% of the population of england. the london underground is the oldest rapid transit system in the world. 0 °f in england in 1976 which also caused many heat related deaths. the greater london built up area is the fourth most populous in europe with about 9. anglican church attendance continues a long steady decline according to church of england statistics. other landmarks include buckingham palace the london eye piccadilly circus st paul s cathedral tower bridge and trafalgar square. england is a country that is part of the united kingdom. in 2012 london became the first city to host three summer olympic games. england s terrain is chiefly low hills and plains especially in central and southern england. at its height in the 2nd century roman london had a population of about 60 000. the oldest proto human bones discovered in england date from 500 000 years ago. the anglo saxon chronicle records that alfred "refounded" london in 886. england began to develop naval skills and exploration to the west intensified. london then grew slowly until a dramatic increase in about 950. he also legally incorporated his ancestral land wales into the kingdom of england with the 1535–1542 acts. london was the focus of the peasants revolt in 1381. england during this period had a centralised well organised and effective government as a result of vast tudor reforms. london was also a centre of england s jewish population before their expulsion by edward i in 1290. with the east india company england also competed with the dutch and french in the east. much of london property passed from church to private ownership which accelerated trade and business in the city. during the elizabethan period england was at war with spain. in the 16th century william shakespeare and his contemporaries lived in london during english renaissance theatre. under the stuart dynasty england expanded in trade finance and prosperity. by the end of the tudor period in 1603 london was still compact. combined these prompted the reform of local government in england in the mid 20th century. in 1637 the government of charles i attempted to reform administration in the london area. england and wales continues to exist as a jurisdiction within the united kingdom. in the east the port of london expanded downstream. before the union england was ruled by its monarch and the parliament of england. london then overtook amsterdam as the leading international financial centre. below the regional level all of england is divided into 48 ceremonial counties. according to samuel johnson you find no man at all intellectual who is willing to leave london. england is closer than any other part of mainland britain to the european continent. the 1948 summer olympics were held at the original wembley stadium while london was still recovering from the war. england also has shores on the irish sea north sea and atlantic ocean. the thames barrier was completed in the 1980s to protect london against tidal surges from the north sea. at 220 miles 350 km the severn is the longest river flowing through england. athens municipality is the largest in population size in greece. cinema cinema first appeared in greece in 1896 but the first actual cine theatre was opened in 1907 in athens. athens ath inz greek αθήνα romanized athína [aˈθina] listen ancient greek ἀθῆναι romanized athênai pl. [atʰɛ̂ːnai̯] is a coastal city in the mediterranean and is both the capital and largest city of greece. classical athens was a powerful city state. government and politics athens became the capital of greece in 1834 following nafplion which was the provisional capital from 1829. athens is home to two unesco world heritage sites the acropolis of athens and the medieval daphni monastery. greece attracted 26. athens joined the unesco global network of learning cities in 2016. the port of piraeus is the largest port in greece and one of the largest in europe. cecrops accepted this gift and declared athena the patron goddess of athens. other forms of song popular today in greece are elafrolaika entechno dimotika and skyladika. athens has been continuously inhabited for at least 5 000 years 3000 bc . greece has the longest coastline on the mediterranean basin featuring thousands of islands. later under rome athens was given the status of a free city because of its widely admired schools. subsequently the junta collapsed in 1974 and greece returned to democratic governance which has continued to this day. after the fourth crusade the duchy of athens was established. greece has a unique cultural heritage large tourism industry and prominent shipping sector. in 1896 athens hosted the first modern olympic games. lack of political unity within greece resulted in frequent conflict between greek states. in 2004 athens hosted the 2004 summer olympics. macedon s defeat at the battle of pydna in 168 bc signalled the end of antigonid power in greece. the cephissus river the ilisos and the eridanos stream are the historical rivers of athens. paul were mostly greek speaking though generally not from greece itself. as may 2022 the crime index from numbeo places athens at 56. john of patmos attest to the importance of churches in greece in early christianity. 8 in in central athens. however this too fell to the ottomans in 1460 completing the ottoman conquest of mainland greece. and with even the acropolis of athens completely covered with snow. the nature of ottoman administration of greece varied though it was invariably arbitrary and often harsh. 4 °f which was recorded in the elefsina and tatoi suburbs of athens on 10 july 1977. greece also accepted the imposition of an international financial control authority to pay off the country s debtors. furthermore metropolitan athens has experienced temperatures of 47. another political issue in 19th century greece was uniquely greek the language question. omonoia omonoia square greek πλατεία ομονοίας is the oldest square in athens. although a dictatorship greece remained on good terms with britain and was not allied with the axis. metaxourgeio greek μεταξουργείο is a neighborhood of athens. since the battle of salamis greece had not achieved the greatness and the glory which today holds. the national garden of athens was completed in 1840 and is a green refuge of 15. in 1952 greece joined nato reinforcing its membership in the western bloc of the cold war. madrid mə drid spanish [maˈðɾið] is the capital and most populous city of spain. the south of madrid became heavily industrialized and there was significant immigration from rural areas of spain. recent history after the fall of the francoist regime the new 1978 constitution confirmed madrid as the capital of spain. madrid was a centre of the anti austerity protests that erupted in spain in 2011. banks based in madrid carry out 72% of the banking activity in spain. the technical university of madrid universidad politécnica de madrid upm is the top technical university in spain. madrid lies on the river manzanares in the central part of the iberian peninsula. the franco regime instead emphasized the city s history as the capital of formerly imperial spain. the climate of madrid features hot summers and cool winters. it is the largest in spain and the second largest in the european union. madrid organises fairs such as fitur arco simo tci and the madrid fashion week. capital of spain madrid is the capital of spain. madrid is home to two world famous football clubs real madrid and atlético madrid. the imperial college church model dome was imitated in all of spain. middle ages the first historical document about the existence of an established settlement in madrid dates from the muslim age. the bank of spain is one of the oldest european central banks. since 1188 madrid won the right to be a city with representation in the courts of castile. it is one of europe s largest financial centres and the largest in spain. the university of alcalá de henares was relocated to madrid in 1836 becoming the central university. 0% in 2006 but less than the average for spain of 21. francoist dictatorship a staple of post war madrid madrid de la posguerra was the widespread use of ration coupons. 3% much higher than spain overall 28. madrid grew through the annexation of neighboring municipalities achieving the present extent of 607 km2 234.  98  41% of economically active people are university graduates against 24% for spain as a whole. madrid is among the sunniest capital cities in europe. 8% remaining lower than in spain as a whole. 8 °f in madrid. industries based on advanced technology are acquiring much more importance here than in the rest of spain. madrid derives almost 73. the national library of spain is the largest major public library in spain. the wider madrid region is the eu region with the highest average life expectancy at birth. the bernabéu also hosted the euro 1964 final which spain won and 1982 fifa world cup final. 7% of respondents in madrid identify themselves as practising catholics 45. education education in spain is free and compulsory from 6 to 16 years. the madrid metropolitan area comprises madrid and the surrounding municipalities. radial roads madrid is the centre of the most important roads of spain. according to eurostat the "metropolitan region" of madrid has a population of slightly more than 6.  72–75 also spain business are designing new high speed trains which will be the new generation ave like talgo avril. law enforcement the madrid municipal police policía municipal de madrid is the local law enforcement body dependent on the ayuntamiento. centralisation and further state building in mainland spain ensued in the 18th century with the bourbon reforms. the stock exchange of thailand set is on ratchadaphisek road in inner bangkok. com – official travel guide by the bma culture sports and tourism department destination bangkok at tourism authority of thailand.  1 asian tourists primarily visit thailand for bangkok and the historical natural and cultural sights in its vicinity. name the origin of the name bangkok บางกอก pronounced in thai as [bāːŋ kɔ̀ːk] listen is unclear. 7 sq mi in the chao phraya river delta in central thailand and has an estimated population of 10. government the city of bangkok is locally governed by the bangkok metropolitan administration bma . 7 sq mi ranking 69th among the other 76 provinces of thailand. in separate elections each district elects one or more city councillors who form the bangkok metropolitan council. thailand had long since become highly centralized around the capital. the tree symbol of bangkok is ficus benjamina. health and education education bangkok has long been the centre of modern education in thailand. with the exception of chachoengsao these provinces together with bangkok form the greater bangkok metropolitan region. however the rate of fatal accidents is much lower than in the rest of thailand. there are no mountains in bangkok. a history of thailand. the highest recorded temperature of bangkok metropolis was 40. thailand also shares maritime borders with vietnam to the southeast and indonesia and india to the southwest. it found that bangkok in 1960 had 193 days at or above 32 °c. thailand is classified as a newly industrialised economy with manufacturing agriculture and tourism as leading sectors. in 2018 bangkok can expect 276 days at or above 32 °c. history prehistory there is evidence of continuous human habitation in present day thailand from 20 000 years ago to the present day. bangkok was ranked as the world s eighth tallest city in 2016.  465  the free thai movement was launched both in thailand and abroad to oppose the government and japanese occupation. demography the city of bangkok has a population of 8 305 218 according to the 2010 census or 12. promised to protect thailand. following its establishment as capital city in 1782 bangkok grew only slightly throughout the 18th and early 19th centuries. rural farmers gained class consciousness and were sympathetic to the communist party of thailand. bangkok is still nevertheless home to a large chinese community with the greatest concentration in yaowarat bangkok s chinatown. thailand had its first elected prime minister in 1988. apart from yaowarat bangkok also has several other distinct ethnic neighbourhoods. the 1997 asian financial crisis originated in thailand and ended the country s 40 years of uninterrupted economic growth. the bangkok metropolitan region had a combined output of 4. a south thailand insurgency escalated starting from 2004. bangkok alone accounts for 48. geography totalling 513 120 square kilometres 198 120 sq mi thailand is the 50th largest country by total area. when the bangkok metropolitan region is considered manufacturing is the most significant contributor at 28. thailand comprises several distinct geographic regions partly corresponding to the provincial groups. the automotive industry based around greater bangkok is the largest production hub in southeast asia. southern thailand consists of the narrow kra isthmus that widens into the malay peninsula. euromonitor international ranked bangkok fourth in its top city destinations ranking for 2016. the chao phraya and the mekong river are the indispensable water courses of rural thailand. islamabad listen urdu اسلام آباد islām ābād is the capital city of pakistan. one of the landmarks for tourists is the pakistan monument built in 2007 located in islamabad. the largest hospital in islamabad is pakistan institute of medical sciences pims hospital. the airport is the largest in pakistan and is located south west of islamabad. the city is served by pakistan railways at islamabad railway station. 2 million people and is federally administered by the pakistani government as part of the islamabad capital territory. other prominent landmarks include the pakistan monument and democracy square. islamabad is home to twenty universities including bahria university quaid e azam university pieas comsats university and nust. construction and development when pakistan gained independence in 1947 the southern port city of karachi was its provisional national capital. toponymy the name islamabad means city of islam. pakistan needed a capital that was easily accessible from all parts of the country. occasionally in writing islamabad is colloquially abbreviated isb. other examples of intertwined islamic and modern architecture include pakistan monument and faisal mosque. in the 1960s islamabad was constructed as a forward capital for several reasons. the murals on the inside of the large petals of pakistan monument are based on islamic architecture. in 1981 islamabad separated from punjab province to form capital territory. thousands of devotees from across pakistan attend the annual urs of bari imam. the city of islamabad expanses an area of 906 square kilometres 350 sq mi . this tourist attraction represents the patriotism and sovereignty of pakistan. simli dam is 30 kilometres 19 mi north of islamabad. paec general hospital and teaching institute established in 2006 is affiliated with the pakistan atomic energy commission. loi bher forest is situated along the islamabad highway covering an area of 1 087 acres 440 ha . the pakistan sports complex has three swimming pools for children. on 23 july 2001 islamabad received a record breaking 620 mm 24 in of rainfall in just 10 hours. pakistan urdu پاکِستان [ˈpaːkɪstaːn] officially the islamic republic of pakistan اِسلامی جمہوریہ پاکِستان is a country in south asia. cda is planning to set up islamabad railway station in sector i 18 and industrial city in sector i 17. pakistan elected a civilian government in 2008 and in 2010 adopted a parliamentary system with periodic elections. zone iv and v consist of islamabad park and rural areas of the city. pakistan is a middle power nation and has the world s sixth largest standing armed forces. however to date only two highways have been constructed kashmir highway the former murree highway and islamabad highway. rahmat ali’s concept of pakistan only related to the north west area of the indian subcontinent. the centaurus is an example of modern architecture under construction in islamabad. history early and medieval age some of the earliest ancient human civilisations in south asia originated from areas encompassing present day pakistan. the newly built islamabad stock exchange towers is another example of modern architecture in the city. the growing political power of the british in bengal had not yet reached the territories of modern pakistan. islamabad has the highest literacy rate in pakistan at 88%. under the british modern pakistan was mostly divided into the sind division punjab province and the baluchistan agency. the labour force of islamabad is 185 213 and the unemployment rate is 15. fazlul haque popularly known as the pakistan resolution. some jobs have relocated from india to islamabad. 5 million muslims moved from india to west pakistan and 4. beijing became the first city in china to require the chinese equivalent to the euro 4 emission standard. the people s daily global times and the china daily english are published in beijing as well. passenger trains in china are numbered according to their direction in relation to beijing. china hosts a large diplomatic community in its capital city of beijing. beijing bay jing chinese 北京 pinyin běijīng mandarin pronunciation [pèɪ. tɕíŋ] listen alternatively romanized as peking pee king is the capital of the people s republic of china. as a megacity beijing is the second largest chinese city by urban population after shanghai. early imperial china after the first emperor unified china in 221 bc jicheng became a prefectural capital for the region. beijing is one of the most important tourist destinations of the world. beijing s tallest building is the 528 meter china zun. in 2018 beijing was the second highest earning tourist city in the world after shanghai. after this "pollution shock" air pollution became an important economic and social concern in china. beijing has been ranked the city with the largest scientific research output by the nature index since 2016. the buddhist academy of china and its library are housed in the fayuan temple near caishikou. etymology over the past 3 000 years the city of beijing has had numerous other names. the china islamic institute is located in the niujie neighborhood in xicheng district. the single chinese character abbreviation for beijing is 京 which appears on automobile license plates in the city. the national seminary of catholic church in china is located in daxing district. the official latin alphabet abbreviation for beijing is "bj". 7 easy fm by china radio international on fm 91. some of the oldest surviving pagodas in beijing date to the liao period including the tianning pagoda. after the communist revolution he served as an opera and performing art counselor in china. in 1153 the jurchen jin made beijing their "central capital" or zhongdu. this made him determined to solve the food shortage in china. the city of beiping became beijing "northern capital" or shuntian in 1403. he introduces western rock to china in 1986 and mixed it with chinese traditional music. beijing became the empire s primary capital and yingtian also called nanjing "southern capital" became the co capital. from beijing direct passenger train service is available to most large cities in china. by the 15th century beijing had essentially taken its current shape. many expressways of china serve beijing as do 15 china national highways. this early qing beijing later formed the setting for the chinese novel dream of the red chamber. expressways to other regions of china are generally accessible from the 3rd ring road outward. yuan maintained his capital at beijing and quickly consolidated power declaring himself emperor in 1915. capital airport is the main hub for air china and hainan airlines. according to one 2005 newspaper report the size of newly developed beijing was one and a half times larger than before. china chinese 中国 pinyin zhōngguó officially the people s republic of china prc is a country in east asia. cityscape architecture three styles of architecture are predominant in urban beijing. japan invaded china in 1937 starting the second sino japanese war and temporarily halting the civil war. 5 in beijing and is also the chief source of nitrogen and sulphur dioxide. china prc is sometimes referred to as the mainland when distinguishing the roc from the prc. therefore japan constructed airports outside tokyo. some hollywood directors have turned to tokyo as a backdrop for movies set in japan. the two top ranking universities in japan are the university of tokyo and kyoto university. as of 2021 tokyo is home to 37 companies of the fortune global 500. these plans have been controversial within japan and have yet to be realized. the tokyo metro ginza line opened in 1927 is the oldest underground metro line in east asia. the iwo chain and the outlying islands have no permanent population but hosts japan self defense forces personnel. the city of tokyo was officially established on may 1 1889. narita international airport in chiba prefecture is the major gateway for international travelers to japan. gallery 1943–1945 in 1943 the city of tokyo merged with the prefecture of tokyo to form the "metropolitan prefecture" of tokyo. japan s flag carrier japan airlines as well as all nippon airways have a hub at this airport. tokyo did not experience fast economic growth until the 1950s. japan japanese 日本 nippon or nihon and formally 日本国 nihonkoku is an island country in east asia. land reclamation projects in tokyo have also been going on for centuries. japan is divided into 47 administrative prefectures and eight traditional regions. the 2011 tōhoku earthquake and tsunami that devastated much of the northeastern coast of honshu was felt in tokyo. japan has the world s highest life expectancy though it is experiencing a population decline. on september 7 2013 the ioc selected tokyo to host the 2020 summer olympics. etymology the name for japan in japanese is written using the kanji 日本 and is pronounced nippon or nihon. tokyo thus became the first asian city to host the olympic games twice. japan first appears in written history in the chinese book of han completed in 111 ad. the average elevation in tokyo is 40 m 131 ft . the edo period gave rise to kokugaku "national studies" the study of japan by the japanese. tokyo has a latitude of 35. the empire of japan invaded other parts of china in 1937 precipitating the second sino japanese war 1937–1945 . under japanese law the prefecture of tokyo is designated as a to 都 translated as metropolis. in 1940 the empire invaded french indochina after which the united states placed an oil embargo on japan. municipalities since 2001 tokyo consists of 62 municipalities 23 special wards 26 cities 5 towns and 8 villages. the war cost japan its colonies and millions of lives. the special wards 特別区 tokubetsu ku of tokyo comprise the area formerly incorporated as tokyo city. in 1947 japan adopted a new constitution emphasizing liberal democratic practices. certain municipal functions such as waterworks sewerage and fire fighting are handled by the tokyo metropolitan government. the nanpō islands are south and east of the main islands of japan. collectively these are often known as the tama area or western tokyo. japan has the sixth longest coastline in the world at 29 751 km 18 486 mi . tokyo has numerous outlying islands which extend as far as 1 850 km 1 150 mi from central tokyo. japan has 111 active volcanoes. the islands form both ogasawara subprefecture and the village of ogasawara tokyo. climate the climate of japan is predominantly temperate but varies greatly from north to south. volcanic eruptions mount fuji is about 100 km 62 mi southwest of tokyo. in the sea of japan region on honshu s west coast northwest winter winds bring heavy snowfall during winter. berlin bur lin german [bɛɐ̯ˈliːn] listen is the capital and largest city of germany by both area and population. following german reunification in 1990 berlin once again became the capital of all of germany. berlin and the surrounding state of brandenburg are the warmest and driest regions in germany. berlin has five of the top 50 tallest buildings in germany. telecommunication since 2017 the digital television standard in berlin and germany is dvb t2. the palaces and parks of potsdam and berlin are the largest world heritage site in germany. berlin is the largest olympic training center in germany. several professional clubs representing the most important spectator team sports in germany have their base in berlin. east and west germany after nazi germany surrendered the allies partitioned berlin and germany s remaining territory into four occupation zones. due to its location in the european plain berlin is influenced by a temperate seasonal climate. 5 million is the second most populous urban area in germany after the ruhr. berlin has served as a scientific artistic and philosophical hub of the enlightenment neoclassicism and liberal revolution. this is why most of the cities and villages in northeastern germany bear slavic derived names germania slavica . berlin in the roaring 1920s was the third largest city in the world by population. in the 1990s the aussiedlergesetze enabled immigration to germany of some residents from the former soviet union. east berlin was declared capital of east germany while bonn became the west german capital. ekbo is a member of the evangelical church in germany ekd and union evangelischer kirchen uek . the first written records of towns in the area of present day berlin date from the late 12th century. capital city berlin is the capital of the federal republic of germany. the central part of berlin can be traced back to two towns. the science and business park in adlershof is the largest technology park in germany measured by revenue. 17th to 19th centuries the thirty years war between 1618 and 1648 devastated berlin. it is also the 4th ranked region in former east germany after jena dresden and potsdam. berlin became the capital of the new kingdom replacing königsberg. partygoers in germany often toast the new year with a glass of sparkling wine. additional suburbs soon developed and increased the area and population of berlin. this will be the first time germany has ever hosted the special olympics world games. in 1861 neighboring suburbs including wedding moabit and several others were incorporated into berlin. various germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern germany since classical antiquity. in 1871 berlin became capital of the newly founded german empire. in 962 the kingdom of germany formed the bulk of the holy roman empire. 20th to 21st centuries in the early 20th century berlin had become a fertile ground for the german expressionist movement. ancient humans were present in germany at least 600 000 years ago. the act increased the area of berlin from 66 to 883 km2 25 to 341 sq mi . however under wilhelm ii germany took an imperialistic course leading to friction with neighbouring countries. the population almost doubled and berlin had a population of around four million. later germany further expanded its colonial empire to include holdings in the pacific and china. all four allies shared administrative responsibilities for berlin. the worldwide great depression hit germany in 1929. airline service to west berlin was granted only to american british and french airlines. they were informally known as west germany and east germany. rome italian and latin roma [ˈroːma] listen is the capital city of italy. that year rome was declared the capital of italy even though it was still under the pope s control. in 1871 the capital of italy was moved from florence to rome. the metropolitan city of rome is the largest by area in italy. when the kingdom of italy annexed rome in 1870 the city had a population of about 225 000. neoclassicism in 1870 rome became the capital city of the new kingdom of italy. fascist architecture the fascist regime that ruled in italy between 1922 and 1943 had its showcase in rome. the subsequent treaty of rome 1924 led to the annexation of the city of fiume to italy. rome is also called "caput mundi" capital of the world . its metropolitan area is the third most populous within italy. famous artists painters sculptors and architects made rome the centre of their activity creating masterpieces throughout the city. 6 million tourists the third most visited in the european union and the most popular tourist destination in italy. in 1871 rome became the capital of the kingdom of italy which in 1946 became the italian republic. national government rome is the national capital of italy and is the seat of the italian government. in 2019 rome was the 14th most visited city in the world with 8. geography location rome is in the lazio region of central italy on the tiber italian tevere river. however it is possible that the name romulus was actually derived from rome itself. 54% while italy as a whole grew by 3. strabo also writes that lucius coelius antipater believed that rome was founded by greeks. the city was ranked in 2014 as 32nd in the global cities index the highest in italy. rome was confirmed as caput mundi i. italy covers an area of 301 230 km2 116 310 sq mi with a population of about 60 million. charles founded the sapienza the university of rome. the franks also helped the formation of the papal states in central italy. during this period rome was neglected until a plebeian man cola di rienzo came to power. the wealth such business brought to italy meant that large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned. in 1377 rome became the seat of the papacy again under gregory xi. liberal period the new kingdom of italy obtained great power status. this brought to rome a century of internal peace which marked the beginning of the renaissance. italy also gained a permanent seat in the league of nations s executive council. during those years the centre of the italian renaissance moved to rome from florence. in 1925 italy forced albania to become a de facto protectorate. in this twenty year period rome became one of the greatest centres of art in the world. in 1939 italy formally annexed albania. italian troops were able to capture rome entering the city through a breach near porta pia. italy entered world war ii on 10 june 1940. the pope declared rome an open city. in italy and yugoslavia unlike in germany few war crimes were prosecuted. the local administration in rome is commonly referred to as "campidoglio" the italian name of the hill. on 8 september italy signed the armistice of cassibile ending its war with the allies. ruling from constantinople sultan selim i relegated egypt to a province with cairo as its capital. nationalists staged large scale demonstrations in cairo in 1919 five years after egypt had been declared a british protectorate. education greater cairo has long been the hub of education and educational services for egypt and the region. transport transport in egypt is centred around cairo and largely follows the pattern of settlement along the nile. cairo is considered a world city with a "beta +" classification according to gawc. dos] which means egypt in coptic the same way it is referred to in egyptian arabic. cairo is also referred to as ⲭⲏⲙⲓ late coptic [ˈkɪ.   the tent served as a garrison town and as the new administrative capital of egypt. sometimes the city is informally referred to as cairo by people from alexandria ipa [ˈkæjɾo] egyptian arabic كايرو . he was accompanied by his stepson ahmad ibn tulun who became effective governor of egypt. despite their military character the mamluks were also prolific builders and left a rich architectural legacy throughout cairo. foundation and expansion of cairo in 969 the shi a isma ili fatimid empire conquered egypt after ruling from ifriqiya. he cited reports of thousands of deaths per day in cairo. he built or restored numerous monuments in cairo in addition to commissioning projects beyond egypt. however during the 16th and 17th centuries cairo remained an important economic and cultural centre. they have the two biggest football teams in egypt. the first printing press of the middle east printing in hebrew was established in cairo c. egypt is internationally known for the excellence of its squash players who excel in both professional and junior divisions. the existence of the press is known solely from two fragments discovered in the cairo genizah. as of 2005 egypt has the largest non oil based gdp in the arab world. under the ottomans cairo expanded south and west from its nucleus around the citadel. egypt still struggles with poverty with almost half the population living on $2 or less a day. bigger changes came to cairo under isma il pasha r. the gulf of aqaba in the northeast separates egypt from jordan and saudi arabia. between 1882 and 1937 the population of cairo more than tripled—from 347 000 to 1. at approximately 100 million inhabitants egypt is the 14th most populated country in the world. after 1956 in the second half of the 20th century cairo continue to grow enormously in both population and area. modern egypt dates back to 1922 when it gained independence from the british empire as a monarchy. between 1947 and 2006 the population of greater cairo went from 2 986 280 to 16 292 269. in 1978 egypt signed the camp david accords officially withdrawing from the gaza strip and recognising israel. as of 2014 about 10% of the population of greater cairo lived in the new cities. islam is the official religion of egypt and arabic is its official language. in 1979 the historic districts of cairo were listed as a unesco world heritage site. during the neolithic era several predynastic cultures developed independently in upper and lower egypt. in 1992 cairo was hit by an earthquake causing 545 deaths injuring 6 512 and leaving around 50 000 people homeless. the badarian culture and the successor naqada series are generally regarded as precursors to dynastic egypt. geologically cairo lies on alluvium and sand dunes which date from the quaternary period.  3150 bce by king menes leading to a series of dynasties that ruled egypt for the next three millennia. metropolitan area and districts the city of cairo forms part of greater cairo the largest metropolitan area in africa. the first two ruling dynasties of a unified egypt set the stage for the old kingdom period c. 1000–1600 under the reign of olaf iii of norway oslo became a cultural centre for eastern norway. on 25 july 1197 sverre of norway and his soldiers attacked oslo from hovedøya. during the middle ages oslo reached its heights in the reign of haakon v of norway. although eastern norway has a number of rivers none of these flow into the ocean at oslo. oslo hosts 2654 of the largest companies in norway. the oslo world music festival showcases people who are stars in their own country but strangers in norway. terrorist attacks one part of the 2011 norway attacks occurred within the oslo centre on 22 july 2011. east norway and its frontier a history of oslo and its uplands 1956 online streeton noëlle l. the capital and largest city in norway is oslo. norway participated in the 1990s brokering of the oslo accords an unsuccessful attempt to resolve the israeli–palestinian conflict. the central gateway to norway by air is oslo airport gardermoen. in 1925 the city after incorporating the village retaining its former name was renamed oslo. the city functioned as the capital of norway during the 1814–1905 union between sweden and norway. oslo is a pilot city of the council of europe and the european commission intercultural cities programme. oslo is the economic and governmental centre of norway. oslo was ranked as the 24th most liveable city in the world by monocle magazine. the black death came to norway in 1349 and like other cities in europe the city suffered greatly. urban region the municipality of oslo has a population of 702 543 as of 31 march 2022. norway was invaded by germany on 9 april 1940. the city of oslo was established as a municipality on 3 january 1838 see formannskapsdistrikt . the waterfalls in akerselva gave power to some of the first modern industry of norway in the 1840s. furthermore oslo shares several important functions with akershus county. the area is surrounded by the sea and is one of the most expensive districts in norway. the suburb called oslo was eventually included in the city proper. the level of education and productivity in the workforce is high in norway. the old town is an area within the administrative district gamle oslo. ullevål stadion is the home arena for the norway national team and the football cup final. the previous names are reflected in street names like oslo gate oslo street and oslo hospital. the tryvann ski resort is the most used ski resort in norway. toponymy the origin of the name oslo has been the subject of much debate. 11 6% of all crimes in norway are reported to be within oslo s centre as of 2020. the seal of oslo shows the city s patron saint st. "urban archaeology in norway. history during the viking age the area that includes modern oslo was located in viken the northernmost province of denmark. oslo online camera allow you to take a virtual trip to the capital and the largest city in norway. according to the norse sagas oslo was founded around 1049 by harald hardrada. the remote arctic island of jan mayen and the archipelago of svalbard also form part of norway. he also started the construction of the akershus fortress and the oslo kongsgård. norway has an extensive coastline facing the north atlantic ocean and the barents sea. the last black death outbreak in oslo occurred in 1654. harald v of the house of glücksburg is the current king of norway. ruling from constantinople sultan selim i relegated egypt to a province with cairo as its capital. nationalists staged large scale demonstrations in cairo in 1919 five years after egypt had been declared a british protectorate. education greater cairo has long been the hub of education and educational services for egypt and the region. transport transport in egypt is centred around cairo and largely follows the pattern of settlement along the nile. cairo is considered a world city with a "beta +" classification according to gawc. dos] which means egypt in coptic the same way it is referred to in egyptian arabic. cairo is also referred to as ⲭⲏⲙⲓ late coptic [ˈkɪ.   the tent served as a garrison town and as the new administrative capital of egypt. sometimes the city is informally referred to as cairo by people from alexandria ipa [ˈkæjɾo] egyptian arabic كايرو . he was accompanied by his stepson ahmad ibn tulun who became effective governor of egypt. despite their military character the mamluks were also prolific builders and left a rich architectural legacy throughout cairo. foundation and expansion of cairo in 969 the shi a isma ili fatimid empire conquered egypt after ruling from ifriqiya. he cited reports of thousands of deaths per day in cairo. he built or restored numerous monuments in cairo in addition to commissioning projects beyond egypt. however during the 16th and 17th centuries cairo remained an important economic and cultural centre. they have the two biggest football teams in egypt. the first printing press of the middle east printing in hebrew was established in cairo c. egypt is internationally known for the excellence of its squash players who excel in both professional and junior divisions. the existence of the press is known solely from two fragments discovered in the cairo genizah. as of 2005 egypt has the largest non oil based gdp in the arab world. under the ottomans cairo expanded south and west from its nucleus around the citadel. egypt still struggles with poverty with almost half the population living on $2 or less a day. bigger changes came to cairo under isma il pasha r. the gulf of aqaba in the northeast separates egypt from jordan and saudi arabia. between 1882 and 1937 the population of cairo more than tripled—from 347 000 to 1. at approximately 100 million inhabitants egypt is the 14th most populated country in the world. after 1956 in the second half of the 20th century cairo continue to grow enormously in both population and area. modern egypt dates back to 1922 when it gained independence from the british empire as a monarchy. between 1947 and 2006 the population of greater cairo went from 2 986 280 to 16 292 269. in 1978 egypt signed the camp david accords officially withdrawing from the gaza strip and recognising israel. as of 2014 about 10% of the population of greater cairo lived in the new cities. islam is the official religion of egypt and arabic is its official language. in 1979 the historic districts of cairo were listed as a unesco world heritage site. during the neolithic era several predynastic cultures developed independently in upper and lower egypt. in 1992 cairo was hit by an earthquake causing 545 deaths injuring 6 512 and leaving around 50 000 people homeless. the badarian culture and the successor naqada series are generally regarded as precursors to dynastic egypt. geologically cairo lies on alluvium and sand dunes which date from the quaternary period.  3150 bce by king menes leading to a series of dynasties that ruled egypt for the next three millennia. metropolitan area and districts the city of cairo forms part of greater cairo the largest metropolitan area in africa. the first two ruling dynasties of a unified egypt set the stage for the old kingdom period c. ottawa listen canadian french [ɔtawɑ] is the capital city of canada. the selection of ottawa as capital selection of ottawa as the capital of canada predates the confederation of canada. by 1885 ottawa was the only city in canada whose downtown street lights were powered entirely by electricity. ottawa has the highest per capita concentration of engineers scientists and residents with phds in canada. the algonquin anishinaabe previously occupied a large tract of land on which ottawa was settled. ottawa is the political centre of canada and headquarters to the federal government. the ottawa valley became habitable around 10 000 years ago following the natural draining of the champlain sea. the supreme court of canada building can also be found in this area. in 1855 bytown was renamed ottawa and incorporated as a city. nordion i stat and the national research council of canada and ohri are part of the growing life science sector. the queen sent a letter to colonial authorities selecting ottawa as the capital effective 31 december 1857. it is also a member of the u15 a group of highly respected research intensive universities in canada. the plan also recommended the creation of the rideau canal and ottawa river pathways. a further 49 countries accredit their embassies and missions in the united states to canada. ottawa became one of canada s largest high tech cities and was nicknamed silicon valley north. canada is a country in north america. jim watson the last mayor of ottawa prior to amalgamation was re elected in the 2010 election. indigenous peoples have continuously inhabited what is now canada for thousands of years. a number of rural communities villages and hamlets are administratively part of the ottawa municipality. in 1791 the area became two british colonies called upper canada and lower canada. the highest temperature ever recorded in ottawa was 37. laurent ended the practice of using dominion in the statutes of canada in 1951. summers are warm and humid in ottawa. the canada act 1982 which brought the constitution of canada fully under canadian control referred only to canada. it connects the saint lawrence river on lake ontario at kingston to the ottawa river near parliament hill. later that year the name of the national holiday was changed from dominion day to canada day. ottawa has had fluvial deposition of until and sands leading to the widespread formation of eskers. infectious diseases killed between 25 and 33 percent of europeans who immigrated to canada before 1891. there are limited distinct features arising from glacial deposits but ottawa was affected by the late winsconsian advance. the great depression in canada during the early 1930s saw an economic downturn leading to hardship across the country. 9% of the total population of ottawa. after two referendums newfoundlanders voted to join canada in 1949 as a province. religion according to the 2021 census religious groups in ottawa included christianity 528 700 persons or 52. canada had established complete sovereignty as an independent country under its own monarchy. 8% around 65% of ottawa residents describe themselves as christian as of 2011 with catholics accounting for 38. geography by total area including its waters canada is the second largest country in the world after russia. ottawa also has regional locations for nokia 3m adobe systems bell canada ibm and hewlett packard. by land area alone canada ranks fourth due to having the world s largest area of fresh water lakes. ottawa already has the largest rural economy among canada s major cities. canada also has vast maritime terrain with the world s longest coastline of 243 042 kilometres 151 019 mi . kabul کابل pashto [kɑˈbəl] dari [kɑːˈbʊl] is the capital and largest city of afghanistan. in 2021 kabul was re captured by the taliban following the withdrawal of american led military forces from afghanistan. islamisation and mongol invasion the islamic conquest reached modern day afghanistan in 642 ad at a time when kabul was independent. on 24 december 1979 the soviet union invaded afghanistan and kabul was heavily occupied by soviet armed forces. on 27 september 1996 the hardline taliban militia seized kabul and established the islamic emirate of afghanistan. da afghanistan bank the nation s central bank was headquartered in kabul. this reform saw kabul as the modern capital of afghanistan today. the afghanistan cricket board acb is the official governing body of the sport and is headquartered in kabul. according to late 2022 estimates the population of kabul was 13. however the taliban ruled city soon fell to the united states after the american led invasion of afghanistan in 2001. in 1996 kabul was captured by the taliban after four years of intermittent fighting with other afghan factions. his ascension to power marked the beginning of afghanistan.  170 ce recorded kabul as καβουρα kabura . the throne was left to his 19 year old son zahir shah who became the last king of afghanistan. the kabul valley was part of the median empire c. in the meantime a nato led international security assistance force isaf was deployed in afghanistan. during that period kabul became a center of learning for zoroastrianism followed by buddhism and hinduism. hundreds of non muslims still remain after the taliban retakeover afghanistan. when alexander annexed the achaemenid empire the kabul region came under his control. 1 billion into urban infrastructure in afghanistan. according to táríkhu l hind by al biruni kabul was governed by princes of turkic lineage. according to transparency international the government of afghanistan was the third most corrupt in the world as of 2010. it was reported that the rulers of kabul were muslims with non muslims living close by. each year about 20 000 foreign tourists visited afghanistan. timurid and mughal era in the 14th century kabul became a major trading centre under the kingdom of timur tamerlane . in 2022 united nations reported that d agree afghanistan is used as a digital and smart city solutions in afghanistan. his wish to be buried in kabul was finally granted. education the ministry of education led by ghulam farooq wardak was responsible for the education system in afghanistan. under mughal governance kabul became a prosperous urban centre endowed with bazaars such as the non extant char chatta. he is the only indian test cricketer to have been born in afghanistan. kabul was also a recreational retreat for the mughals who hunted here and constructed several gardens. historical dictionary of afghanistan. under later mughal emperors kabul became neglected. a historical atlas of afghanistan. many educational institutions were founded in kabul during the 1920s. from india the british attempted to subjugate afghanistan but were repelled in the first anglo afghan war. kabul university opened in 1932 and by the 1960s western educated afghans made up the majority of teachers. afghanistan is prominently rich in natural resources including lithium iron zinc and copper amongst many others. a radio tower built by the germans in 1937 in kabul allowed instant communication with outlying villages. artifacts typical of the paleolithic mesolithic neolithic bronze and iron ages have been found in afghanistan. canberra listen kan bər ə ngunnawal ngambri is the capital city of australia. this event coincided with a heatwave across south eastern australia during which the temperature in canberra reached 108. canberra has the lowest rate of crime of any capital city in australia as of 2019. canberra has been the fastest growing city in australia in recent years having grown 23. the capital city was founded and formally named as canberra in 1913. on 1 january 1901 federation of the colonies of australia was achieved. canberra s main sporting venues are canberra stadium and manuka oval. in contrast other capital cities in australia have substantially less green space. history first inhabitants before british colonisation the area in which canberra would eventually be constructed was inhabited by indigenous australians. the act government was the first jurisdiction in australia to enact legislation to regulate the service. the first british settlers into the canberra area described two clans of ngunnawal people resident to the vicinity. australia is the oldest flattest and driest inhabited continent with the least fertile soils. christopher s cathedral manuka serving the archdiocese of canberra and goulburn. australia s written history commenced with the european maritime exploration of australia. it is the only cathedral in canberra. australia has since maintained a stable liberal democratic political system and wealthy market economy. the largest event in canberra up to world war ii was the 24th meeting of anzaas in january 1939. politically australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy comprising six states and ten territories. the canberra times described it as "a signal event . australia is a highly developed country with a high income economy. canberra was often derisively described as "several suburbs in search of a city". australia is a regional power and has the world s thirteenth highest military expenditure. several government departments together with public servants were moved to canberra from melbourne following the war. several sixteenth century cartographers used the word australia on maps but not to identify modern australia. throughout 2013 several events celebrated the 100th anniversary of the naming of canberra. colloquial names for australia include "oz" and "the land down under" usually shortened to just "down under" . climate under the köppen geiger classification canberra has an oceanic climate cfb . south australia was founded as a "free province" — it was never a penal colony. canberra is protected from the west by the brindabellas which create a strong rain shadow in canberra s valleys. britain s statute of westminster 1931 formally ended most of the constitutional links between australia and the united kingdom. canberra gets 100. from 1939 to 1945 australia joined the allies in fighting the second world war. canberra is also less humid than the nearby coastal areas. since 1951 australia has been a formal military ally of the united states under the anzus treaty. canberra was severely affected by smoke haze during the 2019/2020 bushfires. mainland australia lies between latitudes 9° and 44° south and longitudes 112° and 154° east. the canberra central district is substantially based on walter burley griffin s designs. australia is the driest inhabited continent its annual rainfall averaged over continental area is less than 500 mm. the ban was introduced by the act government in an effort to make canberra more sustainable. mount augustus claimed to be the world s largest monolith is located in western australia. canberra listen kan bər ə ngunnawal ngambri is the capital city of australia. this event coincided with a heatwave across south eastern australia during which the temperature in canberra reached 108. canberra has the lowest rate of crime of any capital city in australia as of 2019. canberra has been the fastest growing city in australia in recent years having grown 23. the capital city was founded and formally named as canberra in 1913. on 1 january 1901 federation of the colonies of australia was achieved. canberra s main sporting venues are canberra stadium and manuka oval. in contrast other capital cities in australia have substantially less green space. history first inhabitants before british colonisation the area in which canberra would eventually be constructed was inhabited by indigenous australians. the act government was the first jurisdiction in australia to enact legislation to regulate the service. the first british settlers into the canberra area described two clans of ngunnawal people resident to the vicinity. australia is the oldest flattest and driest inhabited continent with the least fertile soils. christopher s cathedral manuka serving the archdiocese of canberra and goulburn. australia s written history commenced with the european maritime exploration of australia. it is the only cathedral in canberra. australia has since maintained a stable liberal democratic political system and wealthy market economy. the largest event in canberra up to world war ii was the 24th meeting of anzaas in january 1939. politically australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy comprising six states and ten territories. the canberra times described it as "a signal event . australia is a highly developed country with a high income economy. canberra was often derisively described as "several suburbs in search of a city". australia is a regional power and has the world s thirteenth highest military expenditure. several government departments together with public servants were moved to canberra from melbourne following the war. several sixteenth century cartographers used the word australia on maps but not to identify modern australia. throughout 2013 several events celebrated the 100th anniversary of the naming of canberra. colloquial names for australia include "oz" and "the land down under" usually shortened to just "down under" . climate under the köppen geiger classification canberra has an oceanic climate cfb . south australia was founded as a "free province" — it was never a penal colony. canberra is protected from the west by the brindabellas which create a strong rain shadow in canberra s valleys. britain s statute of westminster 1931 formally ended most of the constitutional links between australia and the united kingdom. canberra gets 100. from 1939 to 1945 australia joined the allies in fighting the second world war. canberra is also less humid than the nearby coastal areas. since 1951 australia has been a formal military ally of the united states under the anzus treaty. canberra was severely affected by smoke haze during the 2019/2020 bushfires. mainland australia lies between latitudes 9° and 44° south and longitudes 112° and 154° east. the canberra central district is substantially based on walter burley griffin s designs. australia is the driest inhabited continent its annual rainfall averaged over continental area is less than 500 mm. the ban was introduced by the act government in an effort to make canberra more sustainable. mount augustus claimed to be the world s largest monolith is located in western australia. doha arabic الدوحة romanized ad dawḥa [adˈdawħa] or ad dōḥa is the capital city and main financial hub of qatar. one year later qatar agreed to be a british protectorate with doha as its official capital. doha was expected to host the 2011 asian indoor games but the qatar olympic committee cancelled the event. theatrical performances are held at qatar national theater and at the qatar national convention center in doha. diplomatic missions to qatar are based in its capital doha. doha holds the wta premier tournament qatar ladies open annually. doha was founded in the 1820s as an offshoot of al bidda. pelly s mission to bahrain and qatar and the peace treaty that resulted were milestones in qatar s history. the city was host to the first ministerial level meeting of the doha development round of world trade organization negotiations. a british political resident noted that should the supply of pearls drop qatar would practically cease to exist . in december 2011 the world petroleum council held the 20th world petroleum conference in doha. in 1993 the qatar open became the first major sports event to be hosted in the city. history establishment of al bidda the city of doha was formed seceding from another local settlement known as al bidda. now modernizing city while preserving traditions is part of the country’s long term plan qatar national vision 2030. with essentially no effective ruler al bidda and doha became a sanctuary for pirates and outlaws. 7 °f on 14 july 2010 which is the highest temperature to have ever been recorded in qatar. isa bin tarif a powerful tribal chief from the al bin ali tribe moved to doha in may 1843. arabic is the official language of qatar. doha was classified as the eastern section of katar. prior to this expatriates were prohibited from owning land in qatar. 20th century pearling had come to play a pivotal commercial role in doha by the 20th century. george greek orthodox church of qatar doha qatar st. the aftermath of the collapse resulted in the establishment of the country s first custom house in doha. economy doha is the economic center of qatar. historically doha had been a commercial port of local significance. the first university in the state qatar university was opened in 1973. post independence qatar officially declared its independence in 1971 with doha as its capital city. 4 sq mi education complex launched by non profit organization qatar foundation began construction in 2000. the al jazeera arabic news channel began broadcasting from doha in 1996. they are al ahli al arabi al sadd al duhail and qatar sc. in bali wto members also agreed on a series of doha agriculture and development issues. al sadd al arabi and qatar sc are the three most successful teams in the league s history. doha is highly urbanized. in december 2010 qatar won the rights to host the 2022 fifa world cup. demographics a significant portion of qatar s population lives within doha and its metropolitan area. theatre theatre was introduced to qatar in the mid 20th century. ethnicity and languages the population of doha is overwhelmingly composed of expatriates with qatari nationals forming a minority. the gulf of bahrain an inlet of the persian gulf separates qatar from nearby bahrain. doha is also home to many expatriates from europe north america south africa and australia. following ottoman rule qatar became a british protectorate in 1916 and gained independence in 1971. kabul کابل pashto [kɑˈbəl] dari [kɑːˈbʊl] is the capital and largest city of afghanistan. in 2021 kabul was re captured by the taliban following the withdrawal of american led military forces from afghanistan. islamisation and mongol invasion the islamic conquest reached modern day afghanistan in 642 ad at a time when kabul was independent. on 24 december 1979 the soviet union invaded afghanistan and kabul was heavily occupied by soviet armed forces. on 27 september 1996 the hardline taliban militia seized kabul and established the islamic emirate of afghanistan. da afghanistan bank the nation s central bank was headquartered in kabul. this reform saw kabul as the modern capital of afghanistan today. the afghanistan cricket board acb is the official governing body of the sport and is headquartered in kabul. according to late 2022 estimates the population of kabul was 13. however the taliban ruled city soon fell to the united states after the american led invasion of afghanistan in 2001. in 1996 kabul was captured by the taliban after four years of intermittent fighting with other afghan factions. his ascension to power marked the beginning of afghanistan.  170 ce recorded kabul as καβουρα kabura . the throne was left to his 19 year old son zahir shah who became the last king of afghanistan. the kabul valley was part of the median empire c. in the meantime a nato led international security assistance force isaf was deployed in afghanistan. during that period kabul became a center of learning for zoroastrianism followed by buddhism and hinduism. hundreds of non muslims still remain after the taliban retakeover afghanistan. when alexander annexed the achaemenid empire the kabul region came under his control. 1 billion into urban infrastructure in afghanistan. according to táríkhu l hind by al biruni kabul was governed by princes of turkic lineage. according to transparency international the government of afghanistan was the third most corrupt in the world as of 2010. it was reported that the rulers of kabul were muslims with non muslims living close by. each year about 20 000 foreign tourists visited afghanistan. timurid and mughal era in the 14th century kabul became a major trading centre under the kingdom of timur tamerlane . in 2022 united nations reported that d agree afghanistan is used as a digital and smart city solutions in afghanistan. his wish to be buried in kabul was finally granted. education the ministry of education led by ghulam farooq wardak was responsible for the education system in afghanistan. under mughal governance kabul became a prosperous urban centre endowed with bazaars such as the non extant char chatta. he is the only indian test cricketer to have been born in afghanistan. kabul was also a recreational retreat for the mughals who hunted here and constructed several gardens. historical dictionary of afghanistan. under later mughal emperors kabul became neglected. a historical atlas of afghanistan. many educational institutions were founded in kabul during the 1920s. from india the british attempted to subjugate afghanistan but were repelled in the first anglo afghan war. kabul university opened in 1932 and by the 1960s western educated afghans made up the majority of teachers. afghanistan is prominently rich in natural resources including lithium iron zinc and copper amongst many others. a radio tower built by the germans in 1937 in kabul allowed instant communication with outlying villages. artifacts typical of the paleolithic mesolithic neolithic bronze and iron ages have been found in afghanistan. hanoi has been the capital of the socialist republic of vietnam since 1976. forbes andrew and henley david vietnam past and present the north history and culture of hanoi and tonkin . the great hanoi rat hunt empire disease and modernity in french colonial vietnam. both đại la and la thành are names of major streets in modern hanoi. 799 top amongst all the municipalities and provinces of vietnam. during the lê dynasty hanoi was known as đông kinh 東京 "eastern capital" . emperors of vietnam usually used dragon 龍 long as a symbol of their imperial strength and power. consequently from about 10 000 to approximately 4 000 years ago hanoi in general was completely absent. during the vietnam war hanoi s transportation facilities were disrupted by the bombing of bridges and railways by the u. hanoi was the centre of đai việt during đại việt s expansion and rule. seventh air force and republic of vietnam air force. by early tenth century ad modern day hanoi was known to the muslim traders as luqin. vital statistics fertility rate birth death and fertility rates preliminarysource general statistics office of vietnam. hanoi was occupied by the french in 1873 and passed to them ten years later. 5% of total exports contributed 17% to the national budget and attracted 22% investment capital of vietnam. rapid urban development and rising costs displaced many residential areas in central hanoi. it is one of the oldest buddhist temples in vietnam. hanoi is the only capital of southeast asia with a subtropical climate. hanoi is the largest center of education in vietnam. hanoi averages 1 612 millimetres 63. understanding vietnam. hanoi can sometimes experience snow in winter. the smaller dragon a political history of vietnam. after the most recent expansion in august 2008 hanoi has a population of 6. the origins of ancient vietnam. as of 1 april 2019 hanoi had a population of 8 053 663 including 3 991 919 males and 4 061 744 females. vietnam borders china to the north and laos and cambodia to the west. hanoi is the second most populous city in the country after ho chi minh city 8 993 082 people . as a result of treaties signed two years later vietnam was also separated into two parts. the average annual population growth rate from 2009 to 2019 of hanoi is 2. between 1804 and 1813 the name vietnam was used officially by emperor gia long. religion buddhism taoism and confucianism are the main religions of hanoi for many years. for the next thousand years what is now northern vietnam remained mostly under chinese rule. in the year 2013 hanoi contributed 12. by the early 10th century northern vietnam had gained autonomy but not sovereignty under the khúc family. in 2003 hanoi had 2 000 businesses engaged in foreign trade having established ties with 161 countries and territories. vietnam was divided into north trịnh and south nguyễn from 1600 to 1777. similar to ho chi minh city hanoi enjoys a rapidly developing real estate market. between 1615 and 1753 french traders also engaged in trade in vietnam. hanoi has allowed many fast food chains into the city such as mcdonald s lotteria pizza hut kfc and others. the việt minh sought independence for vietnam from france and the end of the japanese occupation. stockholm is the cultural media political and economic centre of sweden. 74 000 people in stockholm have a finnish background which makes stockholm home to the largest finnish population in sweden. the stockholm metro is the only underground system in sweden and serves the city of stockholm via 100 stations. outside the city to the east and along the coast is the island chain of the stockholm archipelago. 5% of them 143 167 immigrated to sweden when they were at least 10 years old. it is also the county seat of stockholm county. media stockholm is the media centre of sweden. the population of the municipality of stockholm is expected to reach one million people in 2024. sweden has a total population of 10. it hosts the annual nobel prize ceremonies and banquet at the stockholm concert hall and stockholm city hall. nature in sweden is dominated by forests and many lakes including some of the largest in europe. stockholm developed strong economic and cultural linkages with lübeck hamburg gdańsk visby reval and riga during this time. this led to the forming of the scandinavian kalmar union in 1397 which sweden left in 1523.the krona (swedish: [ˈkrûːna] (listen); plural: kronor; sign: kr; code: sek) is the official currency of the kingdom of sweden. the parties to the union were the scandinavian countries, where the name was krona in sweden and krone in denmark and norway, which in english literally means "crown". the exchange rate of the swedish krona against other currencies has historically been dependent on the monetary policy pursued by sweden at the time.the krona (swedish: [ˈkrûːna] (listen); plural: kronor; sign: kr; code: sek) is the official currency of the kingdom of sweden. in english, the currency is sometimes referred to as the swedish crown, as krona means "crown" in swedish. the swedish krona was the ninth-most traded currency in the world by value in april 2016. a 500 krona banknote (a new denomination) in a blue shade was introduced in 1985 with a portrait of king charles xi and on the reverse an engraving depicts christopher polhem, the "father of swedish engineering". exchange rate\nto see where swedish krona ranks in "most traded currencies", read the article on the foreign exchange market. the exchange rate of the swedish krona against other currencies has historically been dependent on the monetary policy pursued by sweden at the time. "\nto see how circulation of the swedish krona ranks compared to other currencies see bank for international settlements#red books. it is different from the electronic transfers using commercial bank money as central bank money has no nominal credit risk, as it stands for a claim on the central bank, which cannot go bankrupt, at least not for debts in swedish krona in 1634 stockholm became the official capital of the swedish empire. in 2014 sweden celebrated 200 years of peace a longer span of peacetime than even switzerland. in 1697 tre kronor castle burned and was replaced by stockholm palace. sweden maintains a nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. throughout sweden s history walls were created in stockholm to defend the city from attacks. sweden joined the european union on 1 january 1995 but rejected eurozone membership following a referendum. the amount of destruction led to the beginning of the demolition of the stockholm walls. sweden and its people were first described by publius cornelius tacitus in his written work germania 98 ad . however parts of the northern city walls are preserved in the museum of medieval stockholm. sweden and gothia were two separate nations long before that and since antiquity. by the second half of the 19th century stockholm had regained its leading economic role. still sweden remained a poor and economically backward country in which barter was the primary means of exchange. the central parts of the city consist of fourteen islands that are continuous with the stockholm archipelago. in the middle of the 14th century sweden was struck by the black death. for details about the other municipalities in the stockholm area see the pertinent articles. the population of sweden and most of europe was decimated. the semi official name for the municipality is city of stockholm stockholms stad in swedish . this is sometimes considered as the foundation of modern sweden. it is the most central part of stockholm in business and shopping. shortly afterwards the new king rejected catholicism and led sweden into the protestant reformation. stockholm has relatively mild weather compared to other locations at a similar latitude or even farther south. the main exports from sweden were iron and copper. stockholm has an annual average snow cover between 75 and 100 days. swedish empire during the 17th century sweden emerged as a european great power. city governance the stockholm municipal council swedish stockholms kommunfullmäktige is the name of the local assembly. from 1643 to 1645 during the last years of the war sweden and denmark norway fought the torstenson war. the council convenes twice every month at stockholm city hall and the meetings are open to the public. returning to sweden in 1715 charles xii launched two campaigns against norway on 1716 and 1718 respectively. hanoi has been the capital of the socialist republic of vietnam since 1976. forbes andrew and henley david vietnam past and present the north history and culture of hanoi and tonkin . the great hanoi rat hunt empire disease and modernity in french colonial vietnam. both đại la and la thành are names of major streets in modern hanoi. 799 top amongst all the municipalities and provinces of vietnam. during the lê dynasty hanoi was known as đông kinh 東京 "eastern capital" . emperors of vietnam usually used dragon 龍 long as a symbol of their imperial strength and power. consequently from about 10 000 to approximately 4 000 years ago hanoi in general was completely absent. during the vietnam war hanoi s transportation facilities were disrupted by the bombing of bridges and railways by the u. hanoi was the centre of đai việt during đại việt s expansion and rule. seventh air force and republic of vietnam air force. by early tenth century ad modern day hanoi was known to the muslim traders as luqin. vital statistics fertility rate birth death and fertility rates preliminarysource general statistics office of vietnam. hanoi was occupied by the french in 1873 and passed to them ten years later. 5% of total exports contributed 17% to the national budget and attracted 22% investment capital of vietnam. rapid urban development and rising costs displaced many residential areas in central hanoi. it is one of the oldest buddhist temples in vietnam. hanoi is the only capital of southeast asia with a subtropical climate. hanoi is the largest center of education in vietnam. hanoi averages 1 612 millimetres 63. understanding vietnam. hanoi can sometimes experience snow in winter. the smaller dragon a political history of vietnam. after the most recent expansion in august 2008 hanoi has a population of 6. the origins of ancient vietnam. as of 1 april 2019 hanoi had a population of 8 053 663 including 3 991 919 males and 4 061 744 females. vietnam borders china to the north and laos and cambodia to the west. hanoi is the second most populous city in the country after ho chi minh city 8 993 082 people . as a result of treaties signed two years later vietnam was also separated into two parts. the average annual population growth rate from 2009 to 2019 of hanoi is 2. between 1804 and 1813 the name vietnam was used officially by emperor gia long. religion buddhism taoism and confucianism are the main religions of hanoi for many years. for the next thousand years what is now northern vietnam remained mostly under chinese rule. in the year 2013 hanoi contributed 12. by the early 10th century northern vietnam had gained autonomy but not sovereignty under the khúc family. in 2003 hanoi had 2 000 businesses engaged in foreign trade having established ties with 161 countries and territories. vietnam was divided into north trịnh and south nguyễn from 1600 to 1777. similar to ho chi minh city hanoi enjoys a rapidly developing real estate market. between 1615 and 1753 french traders also engaged in trade in vietnam. hanoi has allowed many fast food chains into the city such as mcdonald s lotteria pizza hut kfc and others. the việt minh sought independence for vietnam from france and the end of the japanese occupation. budapest uk us hungarian pronunciation [ˈbudɒpɛʃt] listen is the capital and most populous city of hungary. the biggest casino in budapest and in all of hungary is the las vegas casino corvin sétány. budapest is the largest centre for film and television production in hungary. budapest & hungary travel guide. budapest is a global city with strengths in commerce finance media art fashion research technology education and entertainment. the roman city of aquincum is the best conserved of the roman sites in hungary. opened in 1896 the city s subway system the budapest metro serves 1. in 1361 it became the capital of hungary. 27 million while the budapest tram network serves 1. the unoccupied western part of the country became part of the habsburg monarchy as royal hungary. budapest attracts around 12 million international tourists per year making it a highly popular destination in europe. in 1918 austria hungary lost the war and collapsed hungary declared itself an independent republic republic of hungary . history early history the first settlement on the territory of budapest was built by celts before 1 ad. in 1949 hungary was declared a communist people s republic people s republic of hungary . today this area corresponds to the óbuda district within budapest. the demonstrators demanded to appoint imre nagy to be prime minister of hungary. this made budapest the twin capital of a dual monarchy. in hungary people can declare multiple ethnic identities hence the sum may exceed 100%. budapest also became an important center for the aromanian diaspora during the 19th century. 3% outside hungary while the birthplace of 2 419 people 0. from 24 december 1944 to 13 february 1945 the city was besieged during the battle of budapest. 7% of the population of hungary in 2009 were foreigners 43% of them lived in budapest making them 4. there are two monuments for wallenberg one for carl lutz and one for giorgio perlasca in budapest. nearly two thirds of foreigners living in hungary were under 40 years old. on 23 october 1956 citizens held a large peaceful demonstration in budapest demanding democratic reform. the primary motivation for this age group living in hungary was employment. the demonstrators went to the budapest radio station and demanded to publish their demands. the constitutional court of hungary is one of the highest level actors independent of the politics in the country. budapest is also rich in green areas. the nearby sándor palace contains the offices and official residence of the president of hungary. mean annual precipitation in budapest is around 23. csepel island hungarian csepel sziget [ˈt͡ʃɛpɛlsiɡɛt] is the largest island of the river danube in hungary. the next determinative style is the gothic architecture in budapest. 2 million internet users in hungary 72% of the population . budapest had not one but two architects that were masters of the classicist style. a concise history of hungary. the most iconic and widely known classicist style attraction in budapest is the széchenyi chain bridge. hungary hungarian magyarország [ˈmɒɟɒrorsaːɡ] listen is a landlocked country in central europe. one of his most beautiful buildings in budapest is the museum of applied arts. hungary has a population of 9. etymology the indigenous nepal bhasa term for kathmandu is yen. kathmandu was adopted as the capital of the gorkha empire and the empire itself was dubbed nepal. this indicates around a quarter of the total deaths due to air pollution in nepal are in kathmandu. electricity and water supply electricity in kathmandu is regulated and distributed by the nepal electricity authority nea . furthermore music from all over nepal can be found in kathmandu. kirats who have migrated from other parts of nepal to kathmandu practice mundhum in the city. not surprisingly the best schools and colleges of nepal are located in kathmandu and its adjoining cities. kathmandu is the most important industrial and commercial centre in nepal. the bp highway connects kathmandu to the eastern part of nepal through sindhuli. etymology before the unification of nepal the kathmandu valley was known as nepal. religious and cultural festivities form a major part of the lives of people residing in kathmandu. stone inscriptions are a ubiquitous element at heritage sites and are key sources for the history of nepal. historic areas of kathmandu were severely damaged by a 7. father cabral reported that they reached "cadmendu" the capital of nepal kingdom. thus kathmandu is also known as kāṣṭhamaṇḍap. he brought some gopals along with him and made bhuktaman the king of nepal. "yen" is the shorter form of yambu newar यम्बु which originally referred to the northern half of kathmandu. the name nepal probably originates from this city nayapala. history archaeological excavations in parts of kathmandu have found evidence of ancient civilizations. bhrikuti the princess of nepal who married tibetan monarch songtsän gampo was instrumental in introducing buddhism to tibet. ancient history the ancient history of kathmandu is described in its traditional myths and legends. these served as the capitals of the malla confederation of nepal. during the kirata era a settlement called yambu existed in the northern half of old kathmandu. rana rule rana rule over nepal started with the kot massacre of 1846 which occurred near hanuman dhoka durbar. in some of the sino tibetan languages kathmandu is still called yambu. five major climatic regions are found in nepal. eventually the licchavi ruler gunakamadeva merged koligram and dakshin koligram founding the city of kathmandu. demographics kathmandu s urban cosmopolitan character has made it the most populous city in nepal. rulers from tirhut upon being attacked by the delhi sultanate fled north to the kathmandu valley. in nepal the selection process is very rigorous. during the later part of the malla era kathmandu valley comprised four fortified cities kantipur lalitpur bhaktapur and kirtipur. it served as the seat of national deity lord pashupatinath until nepal was secularized. medieval era early shah rule the gorkha kingdom ended the malla confederation after the battle of kathmandu in 1768. this is among the oldest religious sites in nepal. this marked the beginning of the modern era in kathmandu. a broad typology has been ascribed to the decorative designs and carvings created by the people of nepal. the battle of kirtipur was the start of the gorkha conquest of the kathmandu valley. literature the national library of nepal is located in patan. during the early part of this era kathmandu maintained its distinctive culture. gunla is the traditional music festival according to nepal sambat. a beta global city dhaka is the centre of political economic and culture life in bangladesh. dhaka was declared the national capital by the constituent assembly of bangladesh in 1972. the post independence period witnessed rapid growth as dhaka attracted migrant workers from across rural bangladesh. several important installations of the bangladesh army are also situated in dhaka and mirpur cantonments. the bangladesh navy s principal administrative and logistics base bns haji mohshin is located in dhaka. the bangladesh air force maintains the baf bangabandhu air base and baf khademul bashar air base in dhaka. near old dhaka lies motijheel which is the biggest cbd in bangladesh. dhaka is the centre of the national media in bangladesh. the dhaka premier league is the only domestic list a cricket tournament now in bangladesh. in domestic twenty20 cricket dhaka has a bangladesh premier league bpl franchise known as minister dhaka. the cinema of bangladesh dates back to 1898 when films began screening at the crown theatre in dhaka. the bangladesh national museum is located in ramna dhaka and has a rich collection of antiquities. 4 million residents in the greater dhaka area. in 1971 after the liberation war it became the capital of independent bangladesh. dhaka is one of the major cities of south asia and a major global muslim majority city. geography topography dhaka is located in central bangladesh at 23°42′n 90°22′e on the eastern banks of the buriganga river. dhaka ranks 39th in the world and 3rd in south asia in terms of urban gdp. most ministries of the government of bangladesh are housed in the bangladesh secretariat. the area of dhaka has been inhabited since the first millennium. ethnicity the city population is composed of people from virtually every region of bangladesh. dhaka was the capital of a proto industrialised mughal bengal for 75 years 1608–39 and 1660–1704 . city centre bangladesh is currently the tallest building in the city. the port of dhaka was a major trading post for both riverine and seaborne trade. it is home to the state owned bangladesh television and bangladesh betar. in 2008 dhaka celebrated 400 years as a municipal city. metro dhaka metro rail is a mass rapid transit system serving dhaka bangladesh. the dhaka stock exchange has over 750 listed companies. bangladesh bengali বাংলাদেশ pronounced [ˈbaŋlaˌdeʃ] listen officially the people s republic of bangladesh is a country in south asia. dhaka has a renowned culinary heritage. the creation of eastern bengal and assam in 1905 set a precedent for the emergence of bangladesh. etymology the origins of the name dhaka are uncertain. a referendum and the announcement of the radcliffe line established the present day territorial boundary of bangladesh. so dhaka was most likely used as the watchtower for the fortification purpose. the conflict saw the 1971 bangladesh genocide and the massacre of pro independence bengali civilians including intellectuals. history pre mughal the history of urban settlements in the area of modern day dhaka dates to the first millennium. the new state of bangladesh became the first constitutionally secular state in south asia in 1972. dhaka was viewed with strategic importance due to the mughal need to consolidate control in eastern bengal. in 2010 the bangladesh supreme court reaffirmed secular principles in the constitution. dhaka and chittagong became the eastern frontiers of the mughal empire. a middle power in the indo pacific bangladesh is the second largest economy in south asia. khartoum or khartum kar toom arabic الخرطوم romanized al khurṭūm dinka kaartuɔ̈m is the capital of sudan. "in 1977 the first oil pipeline between khartoum and the port of sudan was completed. there are many universities in khartoum including the university of khartoum and sudan university of science and technology. the khartoum massacre occurred in 2019 during the sudanese revolution. with a population of 5 274 321 its metropolitan area is the largest in sudan. it is served by khartoum international airport and khartoum new international airport is under construction. that year the city was designated as the capital of an independent sudan. etymology the origin of the word khartoum is uncertain. khartoum is an economic and trade centre in northern africa with rail lines from port sudan and el obeid. other beja scholars suggest khartoum is derived from the beja word hartoom "meeting". later it became the administrative center and official capital of sudan. 20th century the arab league summit of 29 august 1967 was held in khartoum as the fourth arab league summit. and sudan. around 425 000 people were placed in five "peace camps" in the desert an hour s drive from khartoum. in 2011 sudan opened the hotel section and part of the food court of the new corinthia hotel tower. on 1 july 2020 activists demanded that al zibar basha street in khartoum be renamed. it is the main hub for sudan airways sudan s main carrier. khartoum records on average six days with 10 mm 0. khartoum has rail lines from wadi halfa port sudan on the red sea and el obeid. demographics almost 250 000 syrians lived in khartoum as of 2019 representing 5% of the total population of the city. all are operated by sudan railways. khartoum has the highest concentration of economic activity in the country. in general the architecture of sudan reflects a wide diversity in its shapes materials and use. one of sudan s largest refineries is located in northern khartoum. culture museums the largest museum in sudan is the national museum of sudan. al qasr street and al jamhoriyah street are considered the most famous high streets in khartoum state. sudan english or arabic السودان romanized as sūdān pronounced [suː. transportation khartoum is home to the largest airport in sudan khartoum international airport. between the 14th and 15th centuries most of sudan was gradually settled by arab nomads. as with many cities in the continent parts of khartoum are connected through privately owned buses. from the early 19th century the entirety of sudan was conquered by the ottomans under the muhammad ali dynasty. khartoum has a number of bridges across both tributaries of the nile. in effect sudan was governed as a british possession. the omdurman bridge the victory bridge and the al dabbasin bridge span the white nile connecting khartoum to omdurman. on 1 january 1956 sudan was duly declared an independent state. the tuti bridge connects tuti island with khartoum. after sudan became independent the jaafar nimeiry regime began islamist rule. international nile club places of worship the places of worship in khartoum primarily consist of muslim mosques. sudan is a developing country and ranks 172nd on the human development index as of 2022. muhammad ahmad died on 22 june 1885 a mere six months after the conquest of khartoum. history prehistoric sudan before c. a beta global city dhaka is the centre of political economic and culture life in bangladesh. dhaka was declared the national capital by the constituent assembly of bangladesh in 1972. the post independence period witnessed rapid growth as dhaka attracted migrant workers from across rural bangladesh. several important installations of the bangladesh army are also situated in dhaka and mirpur cantonments. the bangladesh navy s principal administrative and logistics base bns haji mohshin is located in dhaka. the bangladesh air force maintains the baf bangabandhu air base and baf khademul bashar air base in dhaka. near old dhaka lies motijheel which is the biggest cbd in bangladesh. dhaka is the centre of the national media in bangladesh. the dhaka premier league is the only domestic list a cricket tournament now in bangladesh. in domestic twenty20 cricket dhaka has a bangladesh premier league bpl franchise known as minister dhaka. the cinema of bangladesh dates back to 1898 when films began screening at the crown theatre in dhaka. the bangladesh national museum is located in ramna dhaka and has a rich collection of antiquities. 4 million residents in the greater dhaka area. in 1971 after the liberation war it became the capital of independent bangladesh. dhaka is one of the major cities of south asia and a major global muslim majority city. geography topography dhaka is located in central bangladesh at 23°42′n 90°22′e on the eastern banks of the buriganga river. dhaka ranks 39th in the world and 3rd in south asia in terms of urban gdp. most ministries of the government of bangladesh are housed in the bangladesh secretariat. the area of dhaka has been inhabited since the first millennium. ethnicity the city population is composed of people from virtually every region of bangladesh. dhaka was the capital of a proto industrialised mughal bengal for 75 years 1608–39 and 1660–1704 . city centre bangladesh is currently the tallest building in the city. the port of dhaka was a major trading post for both riverine and seaborne trade. it is home to the state owned bangladesh television and bangladesh betar. in 2008 dhaka celebrated 400 years as a municipal city. metro dhaka metro rail is a mass rapid transit system serving dhaka bangladesh. the dhaka stock exchange has over 750 listed companies. bangladesh bengali বাংলাদেশ pronounced [ˈbaŋlaˌdeʃ] listen officially the people s republic of bangladesh is a country in south asia. dhaka has a renowned culinary heritage. the creation of eastern bengal and assam in 1905 set a precedent for the emergence of bangladesh. etymology the origins of the name dhaka are uncertain. a referendum and the announcement of the radcliffe line established the present day territorial boundary of bangladesh. so dhaka was most likely used as the watchtower for the fortification purpose. the conflict saw the 1971 bangladesh genocide and the massacre of pro independence bengali civilians including intellectuals. history pre mughal the history of urban settlements in the area of modern day dhaka dates to the first millennium. the new state of bangladesh became the first constitutionally secular state in south asia in 1972. dhaka was viewed with strategic importance due to the mughal need to consolidate control in eastern bengal. in 2010 the bangladesh supreme court reaffirmed secular principles in the constitution. dhaka and chittagong became the eastern frontiers of the mughal empire. a middle power in the indo pacific bangladesh is the second largest economy in south asia. the oxford english dictionary included kiev in a quotation published by 1883 and kyiv in 2018. kyiv also spelled kiev is the capital and most populous city of ukraine.  845 912 rurikid prince who ruled 882–912 olga of kiev c. it is in north central ukraine along the dnieper river.  958–1015 grand prince of kiev & ruler of kievan rus from 980 to 1015. the above mentioned sites are also part of the seven wonders of ukraine collection. ukrainian specialties also include chicken kiev and kyiv cake. this territory houses several "mini villages" that represent by region the traditional rural architecture of ukraine. the national art museum of ukraine is a museum dedicated to ukrainian art. the ukraine national football team for example will play matches at the re constructed olympic stadium from 2011. ukraine ukrainian україна romanized ukraïna pronounced [ʊkrɐˈjinɐ] listen is a country in eastern europe. ukraine covers approximately 600 000 square kilometres 230 000 sq mi . during world war ii ukraine was devastated by the german occupation. russia later launched a full scale invasion of ukraine in february 2022. ukraine is a unitary state with a semi presidential system. ukraine is the poorest country in europe by nominal gdp per capita and corruption remains a significant issue. ukraine is also considered to be the likely location of the first domestication of the horse. the kurgan hypothesis places the volga dnieper region of ukraine and southern russia as the urheimat of the proto indo europeans. in the 7th century the territory that is now eastern ukraine was the centre of old great bulgaria. in the 5th and 6th centuries the early slavic antes people lived in ukraine. migrations from the territories of present day ukraine throughout the balkans established many south slavic nations. far eastern areas with an ethnic ukrainian population became known as green ukraine. the short lived west ukrainian people s republic and hutsul republic also failed to join the rest of ukraine. meanwhile the recently constituted soviet ukraine became one of the founding republics of the soviet union. thus eastern galicia and volhynia with their ukrainian population became part of ukraine. significant natural resources in ukraine include lithium natural gas kaolin timber and an abundance of arable land. ukraine has many environmental issues. the world bank has stated that ukraine is highly vulnerable to climate change. all other laws and other normative legal acts of ukraine must conform to the constitution. " the criminal judicial system and the prison system of ukraine remain quite punitive. foreign relations from 1999 to 2001 ukraine served as a non permanent member of the un security council. ukraine has consistently supported peaceful negotiated settlements to disputes. ukraine also has made contributions to un peacekeeping operations since 1992. the european union s partnership and cooperation agreement pca with ukraine went into force in 1998. ukraine is the most active member of the partnership for peace pfp . all major political parties in ukraine support full eventual integration into the european union. the association agreement between ukraine and the european union was signed in 2014. ukraine took consistent steps toward reduction of conventional weapons. military units of other states participated in multinational military exercises with ukrainian forces in ukraine regularly including u. following independence ukraine declared itself a neutral state. the lisbon region has a higher gdp ppp per capita than any other region in portugal. most of the headquarters of multinational corporations in portugal are located in the lisbon area. in 1147 as part of the reconquista crusader knights led by afonso i of portugal besieged and reconquered lisbon. every march the city hosts the lisbon half marathon while in september the portugal half marathon. presently the largest university in portugal is the university of lisbon. in 2005 portugal held the mtv europe music awards in pavilhão atlântico lisbon. lisbon lies in the western iberian peninsula on the atlantic ocean and the river tagus. lisbon is connected to its suburbs and throughout portugal by an extensive motorway network. lisbon is one of two portuguese cities alongside porto to be recognised as a global city. by the 11th and 12th centuries portugale portugallia portvgallo or portvgalliae was already referred to as portugal. lisbon is home to three companies in the global 2000. history prehistory the early history of portugal is shared with the rest of the iberian peninsula located in south western europe. lisbon s name is commonly abbreviated as "lx" or "lx" originating in an antiquated spelling of lisbon as ‘‘lixbõa’’. the name of portugal derives from the joined romano celtic name portus cale. on 6 august 711 lisbon was taken by muslim forces. modern archaeology and research shows a portuguese root to the celts in portugal and elsewhere. with its central location lisbon became the capital city of the new portuguese territory in 1255. there are still many ruins of castros hill forts throughout modern portugal and remains of the castro culture. early modern when the spaniards expelled the jews from spanish territory many of the jews fled to lisbon. the region became known as portucale portugale and simultaneously portugália – the county of portugal. a description of lisbon in the 16th century was written by damião de góis and published in 1554. at this time portugal covered about half of its present area. more than 100 000 refugees were able to flee nazi germany via lisbon. with this battle the house of aviz became the ruling house of portugal. in 1994 lisbon was the european capital of culture. in 1500 pedro álvares cabral discovered brazil and claimed it for portugal. on 3 november 2005 lisbon hosted the mtv european music awards. subsequently philip ii of spain claimed the throne and was accepted as philip i of portugal. the larger lisbon metropolitan area includes the setúbal peninsula to the south. portugal did not lose its formal independence briefly forming a union of kingdoms. the coldest temperature ever recorded in lisbon was −1. in 1640 john iv of portugal spearheaded an uprising backed by disgruntled nobles and was proclaimed king. the highest temperature ever recorded in lisbon was 44. this was the beginning of the house of braganza which reigned in portugal until 1910. lisbon has around 750 mm 30 in of precipitation per year. king john v however was not pleased and recalled carvalho e melo to portugal in 1749. freguesias the municipality of lisbon included 53 freguesias until november 2012. further titled "marquês de pombal" in 1770 he effectively ruled portugal until joseph i s death in 1777. belém is one of the most visited lisbon districts. napoleonic era with the invasions by napoleon portugal began a slow but inexorable decline that lasted until the 20th century. ecuador also asked unasur to return the headquarters building of the organization based in its capital city quito. in 1978 quito and kraków were the first world cultural heritage sites declared by unesco. the majority of transnational companies with a presence in ecuador are headquartered there. quito is the capital city closest to the equator with its northern limits ending about 1 km 0. geography quito is located in the northern highlands of ecuador in the guayllabamba river basin. history pre columbian period the oldest traces of human presence in quito were excavated by american archeologist robert e. pope john paul ii headed a great mass in the park during his visit to ecuador in 1985. early colonial priests and historians wrote about the quitu people and a kingdom of quito. the zoo works in conservation and education in ecuador and has successfully bred the endangered andean condor. in 1563 quito became the seat of a real audiencia administrative district of spain. museums national museum of ecuador – this art museum houses five displays. the spanish established roman catholicism in quito. each covers a different time period ranging from prehistory to modern ecuador. in 1743 after nearly 210 years of spanish colonization quito was a city of about 10 000 inhabitants. ecuador also includes the galápagos islands in the pacific about 1 000 kilometers 621 mi west of the mainland. quito briefly proclaimed its de facto independence from spain between 1765 and 1766 during the quito revolt. etymology the country s name means "equator" in spanish truncated from the spanish official name república del ecuador lit. on 10 august 1809 a movement was again started in quito to win independence from spain. history pre inca era various peoples had settled in the area of future ecuador before the arrival of the incas. their victory established the independence of quito and the surrounding areas. similarly a number of loyal inca subjects from peru and bolivia were brought to ecuador to prevent rebellion. in 1875 the country s president gabriel garcía moreno was assassinated in quito. thus the region of highland ecuador became part of the inca empire in 1463 sharing the same language. his body was dragged through the streets of quito to a city park where it was burned. as a result inca expansion into the amazon basin and the pacific coast of ecuador was hampered. quito is the closest capital city to the equator. following the battle ecuador joined simón bolívar s republic of gran colombia also including modern day colombia venezuela and panama. quito is the only capital city that was developed so close to an active volcano. in 1830 ecuador separated from gran colombia and became an independent republic. because of its altitude and location on the equator quito has a fairly constant cool climate. the 19th century was marked by instability for ecuador with a rapid succession of rulers. the fact that quito lies almost on the equator means that high pressure systems are extremely rare. ecuador protested that it claimed the amazon basin between the caqueta river and the marañon amazon river. despite the absence of high pressure quito can still experience settled weather. then on 6 february 1937 ecuador presented a transactional line which peru rejected the next day. petroecuador the largest company in the country and one of the largest in latin america is headquartered in quito. the pipeline in southern ecuador did nothing to resolve tensions between ecuador and peru however. the position also doubles as mayor of the metropolitan district of quito the canton . a notable event was the cenepa war fought between ecuador and peru in 1995. inside quito the city proper subdivision into urban parishes depends on the organizations that use these parishes e. the us dollar has been the only official currency of ecuador since the year 2000. the lisbon region has a higher gdp ppp per capita than any other region in portugal. most of the headquarters of multinational corporations in portugal are located in the lisbon area. in 1147 as part of the reconquista crusader knights led by afonso i of portugal besieged and reconquered lisbon. every march the city hosts the lisbon half marathon while in september the portugal half marathon. presently the largest university in portugal is the university of lisbon. in 2005 portugal held the mtv europe music awards in pavilhão atlântico lisbon. lisbon lies in the western iberian peninsula on the atlantic ocean and the river tagus. lisbon is connected to its suburbs and throughout portugal by an extensive motorway network. lisbon is one of two portuguese cities alongside porto to be recognised as a global city. by the 11th and 12th centuries portugale portugallia portvgallo or portvgalliae was already referred to as portugal. lisbon is home to three companies in the global 2000. history prehistory the early history of portugal is shared with the rest of the iberian peninsula located in south western europe. lisbon s name is commonly abbreviated as "lx" or "lx" originating in an antiquated spelling of lisbon as ‘‘lixbõa’’. the name of portugal derives from the joined romano celtic name portus cale. on 6 august 711 lisbon was taken by muslim forces. modern archaeology and research shows a portuguese root to the celts in portugal and elsewhere. with its central location lisbon became the capital city of the new portuguese territory in 1255. there are still many ruins of castros hill forts throughout modern portugal and remains of the castro culture. early modern when the spaniards expelled the jews from spanish territory many of the jews fled to lisbon. the region became known as portucale portugale and simultaneously portugália – the county of portugal. a description of lisbon in the 16th century was written by damião de góis and published in 1554. at this time portugal covered about half of its present area. more than 100 000 refugees were able to flee nazi germany via lisbon. with this battle the house of aviz became the ruling house of portugal. in 1994 lisbon was the european capital of culture. in 1500 pedro álvares cabral discovered brazil and claimed it for portugal. on 3 november 2005 lisbon hosted the mtv european music awards. subsequently philip ii of spain claimed the throne and was accepted as philip i of portugal. the larger lisbon metropolitan area includes the setúbal peninsula to the south. portugal did not lose its formal independence briefly forming a union of kingdoms. the coldest temperature ever recorded in lisbon was −1. in 1640 john iv of portugal spearheaded an uprising backed by disgruntled nobles and was proclaimed king. the highest temperature ever recorded in lisbon was 44. this was the beginning of the house of braganza which reigned in portugal until 1910. lisbon has around 750 mm 30 in of precipitation per year. king john v however was not pleased and recalled carvalho e melo to portugal in 1749. freguesias the municipality of lisbon included 53 freguesias until november 2012. further titled "marquês de pombal" in 1770 he effectively ruled portugal until joseph i s death in 1777. belém is one of the most visited lisbon districts. napoleonic era with the invasions by napoleon portugal began a slow but inexorable decline that lasted until the 20th century. external links riga municipality portal in latvian rīga latvia at jewishgen old maps of riga in historic cities site. riga was founded in 1201 and is a former hanseatic league member. on 17 june 1940 the soviet forces invaded latvia occupying bridges post/telephone telegraph and broadcasting offices. riga was the european capital of culture in 2014 along with umeå in sweden. in 2022 citizens of latvia made up 79. in 2016 riga received over 1. it is one of the biggest theatres in latvia. the city is served by riga international airport the largest and busiest airport in the baltic states. international overnight service is with latvia express trains latvian latvijas ekspresis . english geographer richard hakluyt 1589 corroborates this account calling riga rie as pronounced in latvian. "the urban heritage of the soviet regime the case of riga latvia. albert landed in riga in 1200 with 23 ships and 500 westphalian crusaders. latvia covers an area of 64 589 km2 24 938 sq mi with a population of 1. in 1211 riga minted its first coinage and albert laid the cornerstone for the riga dom. since then latvia has been a democratic unitary parliamentary republic. riga was not yet secure as an alliance of tribes failed to take riga. henry of latvia coined the latinisations of the country s name "lettigallia" and "lethia" both derived from the latgalians. in 1221 they acquired the right to independently self administer riga and adopted a city constitution. at the beginning of the 13th century germans ruled large parts of what is currently latvia. hanseatic league in 1282 riga became a member of the hanseatic league. under swedish and largely german rule western latvia adopted lutheranism as its main religion. riga accepted the reformation in 1522 ending the power of the archbishops. since then it has been amended and is still in effect in latvia today. during the russo swedish war 1656–1658 riga withstood a siege by russian forces. the soviet union incorporated latvia on 5 august 1940 as the latvian soviet socialist republic. along with the other livonian towns and gentry riga capitulated to russia but largely retained their privileges.  64   56 under german occupation latvia was administered as part of reichskommissariat ostland. riga was made the capital of the governorate of riga later livonia . 30 000 jews were shot in latvia in the autumn of 1941. as a result of the battle of jugla the german army marched into riga on 3 september 1917. in the post war period latvia was made to adopt soviet farming methods. latvia with riga as its capital city thus declared its independence on 18 november 1918. latvia had its own film industry and musical records factory lps . on 25 october 1941 the nazis relocated all jews from riga and the vicinity to the ghetto. the population of latvia reached its peak in 1990 at just under 2. the soviet red army re entered riga on 13 october 1944. however the central power in moscow continued to regard latvia as a soviet republic in 1990 and 1991. in 1989 the percentage of latvians in riga had fallen to 36. during the transitional period moscow maintained many central soviet state authorities in latvia. riga was the european capital of culture in 2014. latvia resumed diplomatic relations with western states including sweden. india officially the republic of india hindi bhārat gaṇarājya is a country in south asia. still later mammals entered india from asia through two zoogeographical passes flanking the himalayas. climates range from arctic and subarctic in siberia to tropical in southern india and southeast asia. by 1200 bce an archaic form of sanskrit an indo european language had diffused into india from the northwest. in south india the middle kingdoms exported dravidian languages scripts and religious cultures to the kingdoms of southeast asia. preserved by a resolutely vigilant oral tradition the rigveda records the dawning of hinduism in india. the earliest known modern human remains in south asia date to about 30 000 years ago. the dravidian languages of india were supplanted in the northern and western regions. it participates in the east asia summit the g8+5 and other multilateral forums. in the 15th century the vijayanagara empire created a long lasting composite hindu culture in south india. asia listen also uk is a continent which is part of eurasia. india has been a federal republic since 1950 governed through a democratic parliamentary system. the border between asia and europe was historically defined by european academics. among the socio economic challenges india faces are gender inequality child malnutrition and rising levels of air pollution. asia–oceania boundary the border between asia and the region of oceania is usually placed somewhere in the malay archipelago. temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as india underwent another urbanisation. asia does not exactly correspond to the cultural borders of its various types of constituents. the sultanate was to control much of north india and to make many forays into south india. one of the first classical writers to use asia as a name of the whole continent was pliny. per the london declaration india retained its membership of the commonwealth becoming the first republic within it. classical antiquity latin asia and greek ἀσία appear to be the same word. the remaining indian plate survives as peninsular india the oldest and geologically most stable part of india. roman authors translated ἀσία as asia. it extends as far north as the satpura and vindhya ranges in central india. there was an asia minor and an asia major located in modern day iraq. temperatures in india have risen by 0. many of these are geographic doris rhodea europa asia. climate change in india is often thought to be the cause. asia is generally defined as comprising the eastern four fifths of eurasia. india is a habitat for 8. tropical rainforests stretch across much of southern asia and coniferous and deciduous forests lie farther north. it predominates in the tropical moist forest of the andaman islands the western ghats and northeast india. main regions there are various approaches to the regional division of asia. federalism in india defines the power distribution between the union and the states. some of the largest daily temperature ranges on earth occur in western sections of asia. the prime minister of india is the head of government and exercises most executive power. according to citigroup 9 of 11 global growth generators countries came from asia driven by population and income growth. legislature the legislature of india is the bicameral parliament. asia has three main financial centers hong kong tokyo and singapore. aside from ongoing its special relationship with russia india has wide ranging defence relations with israel and france. in 2010 asia had 3. major cities and urban areas the three largest urban areas of europe are moscow london and paris. opened in 1900 the city s subway system the paris métro serves 5. 23 million passengers daily it is the second busiest metro system in europe after the moscow metro. paris is especially known for its museums and architectural landmarks the louvre received 2. with 200 000 inhabitants in 1328 paris then already the capital of france was the most populous city of europe. the football club paris saint germain and the rugby union club stade français are based in paris. there are also many business schools including hec insead essec and escp europe. paris hosts the annual french open grand slam tennis tournament on the red clay of roland garros. it is the largest hospital system in europe. every july the tour de france bicycle race finishes on the avenue des champs élysées in paris. europe covers about 10. in any case the city s name is not related to the paris of greek mythology. europe had a total population of about 745 million about 10% of the world population in 2021. by the 1860s the boulevards and streets of paris were illuminated by 56 000 gas lamps. since the age of discovery started by spain and portugal europe played a predominant role in global affairs. since the late 19th century paris has also been known as panam e pronounced [panam] in french slang. definition contemporary definition the prevalent definition of europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid 19th century. the romans conquered the paris basin in 52 bc and began their settlement on paris s left bank. "europe" as used specifically in british english may also refer to continental europe exclusively. in the summer of 1789 paris became the centre stage for the french revolution. such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term europe by its users. louis xvi and the royal family were brought to paris and made prisoners within the tuileries palace. instead the concept of "western civilization" emerged as a way of grouping together europe and these colonies. napoleon bonaparte replaced the elected government of paris with a prefect reporting only to him. 8 million years ago in georgia is the earliest hominin to have been discovered in europe. louis philippe was overthrown by a popular uprising in the streets of paris in 1848. the neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans cro magnons who appeared in europe around 43 000 to 40 000 years ago. during the franco prussian war 1870–1871 paris was besieged by the prussian army. homo sapiens arrived in europe around 54 000 years ago some 10 000 years earlier than previously thought. on 28 march a revolutionary government called the paris commune seized power in paris. the earliest sites in europe dated 48 000 years ago are riparo mochi italy geissenklösterle germany and isturitz france . 20th and 21st centuries by 1901 the population of paris had grown to about 2 715 000. 3200 bce in greece with the minoan civilisation on crete the first advanced civilisation in europe. in march 2001 bertrand delanoë became the first socialist mayor of paris. east central europe saw the creation of the first slavic states and the adoption of christianity c. in january 2015 al qaeda in the arabian peninsula claimed attacks across the paris region. feudalism developed in france in the early middle ages and soon spread throughout europe. paris has several prominent hills the highest of which is montmartre at 130 m 427 ft . through monasteries and cathedral schools the church was responsible for education in much of europe. paris has an average annual precipitation of 641 mm 25. in europe itself the church organised the inquisition against heretics. china chinese 中国 pinyin zhōngguó officially the people s republic of china prc is a country in east asia. the himalaya karakoram pamir and tian shan mountain ranges separate china from much of south and central asia. japan invaded china in 1937 starting the second sino japanese war and temporarily halting the civil war. asia listen also uk is a continent which is part of eurasia. china prc is sometimes referred to as the mainland when distinguishing the roc from the prc. the border between asia and europe was historically defined by european academics. han china gradually became the largest economy of the ancient world. asia–oceania boundary the border between asia and the region of oceania is usually placed somewhere in the malay archipelago. the remnants of the song retreated to southern china. asia does not exactly correspond to the cultural borders of its various types of constituents. the qing dynasty which lasted from 1644 until 1912 was the last imperial dynasty of china. one of the first classical writers to use asia as a name of the whole continent was pliny. its conquest of the ming 1618–1683 cost 25 million lives and the economy of china shrank drastically. classical antiquity latin asia and greek ἀσία appear to be the same word. after yuan shikai s death in 1916 china was politically fragmented. roman authors translated ἀσία as asia. china emerged victorious but war ravaged and financially drained. there was an asia minor and an asia major located in modern day iraq. however remaining kuomintang forces continued to wage an insurgency in western china throughout the 1950s. many of these are geographic doris rhodea europa asia. china developed an independent industrial system and its own nuclear weapons. asia is generally defined as comprising the eastern four fifths of eurasia. china adopted its current constitution on 4 december 1982. tropical rainforests stretch across much of southern asia and coniferous and deciduous forests lie farther north. in 2013 china initiated the belt and road initiative a global infrastructure investment project. main regions there are various approaches to the regional division of asia. china was the only major economy in the world to grow in 2020 recording a 2. climates range from arctic and subarctic in siberia to tropical in southern india and southeast asia. these zero covid strategies have led to a variety of protests across china against them starting in november 2022. some of the largest daily temperature ranges on earth occur in western sections of asia. the territory of china lies between latitudes 18° and 54° n and longitudes 73° and 135° e. according to citigroup 9 of 11 global growth generators countries came from asia driven by population and income growth. the geographical center of china is marked by the center of the country monument at 35°50′40. asia has three main financial centers hong kong tokyo and singapore. a major environmental issue in china is the continued expansion of its deserts particularly the gobi desert. in 2010 asia had 3. according to academics in order to limit climate change in china to 1. last year asia had toppled europe. 7 °f electricity generation from coal in china without carbon capture must be phased out by 2045. abrahamic the abrahamic religions including judaism christianity islam druze faith and baháʼí faith originated in west asia. 7 million tourists in 2007 making greece one of the most visited countries in europe in the recent years. 3200 bce in greece with the minoan civilisation on crete the first advanced civilisation in europe. greece has the longest coastline on the mediterranean basin featuring thousands of islands. greece officially the hellenic republic is a country in southeast europe. subsequently the junta collapsed in 1974 and greece returned to democratic governance which has continued to this day. this had the effect of galvanizing public opinion in western europe in favour of the greek rebels. greece has a unique cultural heritage large tourism industry and prominent shipping sector. the six shipyards around the port of piraeus are among the largest in europe. lack of political unity within greece resulted in frequent conflict between greek states. after 1453 a number of greek byzantine scholars who fled to western europe contributed to the renaissance. macedon s defeat at the battle of pydna in 168 bc signalled the end of antigonid power in greece. as of 2012 it ranked 4th in the world and 2nd in europe. paul were mostly greek speaking though generally not from greece itself. k maroussi have won 3 triple crowns 5 saporta cups 2 korać cups and 1 fiba europe champions cup. john of patmos attest to the importance of churches in greece in early christianity. the thessaloniki international film festival is one of the most important film festivals in southern europe. however this too fell to the ottomans in 1460 completing the ottoman conquest of mainland greece. europe covers about 10. the nature of ottoman administration of greece varied though it was invariably arbitrary and often harsh. europe had a total population of about 745 million about 10% of the world population in 2021. greece also accepted the imposition of an international financial control authority to pay off the country s debtors. since the age of discovery started by spain and portugal europe played a predominant role in global affairs. another political issue in 19th century greece was uniquely greek the language question. definition contemporary definition the prevalent definition of europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid 19th century. although a dictatorship greece remained on good terms with britain and was not allied with the axis. "europe" as used specifically in british english may also refer to continental europe exclusively. since the battle of salamis greece had not achieved the greatness and the glory which today holds. such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term europe by its users. in 1952 greece joined nato reinforcing its membership in the western bloc of the cold war. instead the concept of "western civilization" emerged as a way of grouping together europe and these colonies. greece rejoined nato in 1980. 8 million years ago in georgia is the earliest hominin to have been discovered in europe. in the late 2000s greece suffered substantially from the great recession and the related european sovereign debt crisis. the neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans cro magnons who appeared in europe around 43 000 to 40 000 years ago. left wing party syriza led by prime minister alexis tsipras governed greece from 2015 to 2019. homo sapiens arrived in europe around 54 000 years ago some 10 000 years earlier than previously thought. in march 2020 greece s parliament elected a non partisan candidate ekaterini sakellaropoulou as the first female president of greece. the earliest sites in europe dated 48 000 years ago are riparo mochi italy geissenklösterle germany and isturitz france . western greece contains a number of lakes and wetlands and is dominated by the pindus mountain range. east central europe saw the creation of the first slavic states and the adoption of christianity c. nigeria ny jeer ee ə officially the federal republic of nigeria is a country in west africa. nigeria is a regional power in africa and a middle and emerging power in international affairs. nigeria is a leader in africa as a financial market in pharmaceuticals and in the entertainment industry. as of january 2022 nigeria is the host 5 out of the 7 unicorn companies in africa. nigeria became a formally independent federation on 1 october 1960. britain s west africa squadron sought to intercept the smugglers at sea. etymology the name nigeria was taken from the niger river running through the country. by the middle of the 20th century a great wave for independence was sweeping across africa. the nok civilization of nigeria thrived between 1 500 bc and ad 200. it supported movements against white minority governments in the southern africa sub region. the yoruba kingdoms of ife and oyo in southwestern nigeria became prominent in the 12th and 14th centuries respectively. lagos is regarded as one of the largest technology hubs in africa with its thriving tech ecosystem. slave routes were established throughout nigeria linking the hinterland areas with the major coastal ports. infrastructure roads nigeria has the largest road network in west africa. the territory controlled by the empire included much of modern day northern and central nigeria. since 2021 the islamic state in west africa iswap appears more dominant than boko haram. administratively nigeria remained divided into the northern and southern protectorates and lagos colony. joshua s emmanuel tv originating from nigeria is one of the most viewed television stations across africa. southern cameroons opted to join the republic of cameroon while northern cameroons chose to join nigeria. the nigerian premier league has become one of the biggest and most watched basketball competitions in africa. babangida s regime has been considered the most corrupt and responsible for creating a culture of corruption in nigeria. africa is the world s second largest and second most populous continent after asia in both cases. nigeria used part of its oil profits to pay the residual 40% freeing up at least $1. these entrenched environmental concerns are expected to worsen as climate change impacts africa. nigeria lies between latitudes 4° and 14°n and longitudes 2° and 15°e. the un intergovernmental panel on climate change has identified africa as the continent most vulnerable to climate change. the highest point in nigeria is chappal waddi at 2 419 m 7 936 ft . the history of africa is long complex and has often been under appreciated by the global historical community. the chad basin is fed from the north eastern quarter of nigeria. early human civilizations such as ancient egypt and carthage emerged in north africa. in addition nigeria has numerous coastal rivers. most present states in africa emerged from a process of decolonisation following world war ii. between 1990 and 2005 in total nigeria lost 35. africa would be for the egyptians "the birthplace. nigeria had a 2019 forest landscape integrity index mean score of 6. a major climatic recession occurred lessening the heavy and persistent rains in central and eastern africa. in 2022 nigeria suffered 125 deaths from explosions at local illegal refineries. the domestication of cattle in africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside hunter gatherer cultures. law the constitution of nigeria is the supreme law of the country. it is speculated that by 6000 bce cattle were domesticated in north africa. france became the most populous country in europe and had tremendous influence over european politics economy and culture. during this era france had been using romanesque architecture like most of western europe. feudalism developed in france in the early middle ages and soon spread throughout europe. in the aftermath of the peace of westphalia france rose to predominance within europe. in the high middle ages france was a powerful but highly decentralised feudal kingdom. pepin s son charlemagne reunited the frankish kingdoms and built a vast empire across western and central europe. france performs well in international rankings of education health care and life expectancy. his armies conquered most of continental europe with swift victories such as the battles of jena auerstadt or austerlitz. the borders of modern france roughly correspond to ancient gaul which was inhabited by celtic gauls. however he opposed any development of a supranational europe favouring a europe of sovereign nations. west francia approximated the area occupied by and was the precursor to modern france. the paris region has the highest concentration of multinational firms in europe. thus was established feudalism in france. 4% in europe and 15. the war cost france 300 000 casualties. rail connections exist to all other neighbouring countries in europe except andorra. remembered for numerous wars the so called sun king made france the leading european power. western europe is now serviced by a network of tgv lines. during his reign france took colonial control of many overseas territories in the americas africa and asia. europe covers about 10. a prussian army invaded france later in august 1792. europe had a total population of about 745 million about 10% of the world population in 2021. by the end of 1793 the allies had been driven from france. since the age of discovery started by spain and portugal europe played a predominant role in global affairs. france in february 1794 abolished slavery in its american colonies but would reintroduce it later. definition contemporary definition the prevalent definition of europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid 19th century. france and the allies emerged victorious against the central powers at a tremendous human and material cost. "europe" as used specifically in british english may also refer to continental europe exclusively. in 1940 france was invaded and quickly defeated by nazi germany. such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term europe by its users. france was one of the founding members of nato 1949 . instead the concept of "western civilization" emerged as a way of grouping together europe and these colonies. this conflict wracked the country and nearly led to a coup and civil war in france. 8 million years ago in georgia is the earliest hominin to have been discovered in europe. around one million pied noirs and harkis fled from algeria to france upon independence. the neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans cro magnons who appeared in europe around 43 000 to 40 000 years ago. france has also gradually but fully reintegrated into nato and has since participated in most nato sponsored wars. homo sapiens arrived in europe around 54 000 years ago some 10 000 years earlier than previously thought. since the 19th century france has received many immigrants. the earliest sites in europe dated 48 000 years ago are riparo mochi italy geissenklösterle germany and isturitz france . kenya officially the republic of kenya swahili jamhuri ya kenya is a country in east africa. as of 2020 kenya is the third largest economy in sub saharan africa after nigeria and south africa. in 1920 the east africa protectorate was turned into a colony and renamed kenya after its highest mountain. the presbyterian church of east africa has 3 million followers in kenya and surrounding countries. at 580 367 square kilometres 224 081 sq mi kenya is the world s 48th largest country by area. africa is kenya s largest export market followed by the european union. 6 million in the 2019 census kenya is the 27th most populous country in the world. in mid 2011 two consecutive missed rainy seasons precipitated the worst drought in east africa in 60 years. nilotic speaking pastoralists ancestral to kenya s nilotic speakers began migrating from present day south sudan into kenya around 500 bc. the kenyan highlands are one of the most successful agricultural production regions in africa. after independence kenya remained a member of the commonwealth of nations. this serengeti migration of the wildebeest is listed among the seven natural wonders of africa. with a gni of 1 840 kenya is a lower middle income economy. the nairobi securities exchange nse is ranked 4th in africa in terms of market capitalisation. etymology the republic of kenya is named after mount kenya. 5 percent of the kenyan adult population was illiterate which was the highest rate of literacy in east africa. kenya as mt. kenya profile from africa. the official name was changed to the colony of kenya in 1920. africa is the world s second largest and second most populous continent after asia in both cases. history human prehistory fossils found in kenya have shown that primates inhabited the area for more than 20 million years. these entrenched environmental concerns are expected to worsen as climate change impacts africa. neolithic the first inhabitants of present day kenya were hunter gatherer groups akin to the modern khoisan speakers. the un intergovernmental panel on climate change has identified africa as the continent most vulnerable to climate change. around 500 bc nilotic speaking pastoralists ancestral to kenya s nilotic speakers started migrating from present day southern sudan into kenya. the history of africa is long complex and has often been under appreciated by the global historical community. nilotic groups in kenya include the kalenjin samburu luo turkana and maasai. early human civilizations such as ancient egypt and carthage emerged in north africa. at its height its authority stretched over the entire length of the swahili coast including kenya. most present states in africa emerged from a process of decolonisation following world war ii. the pair were the first europeans to sight mount kenya. africa would be for the egyptians "the birthplace. by the 1950s there were 80 000 white settlers living in kenya. a major climatic recession occurred lessening the heavy and persistent rains in central and eastern africa. throughout world war ii kenya was an important source of manpower and agriculture for the united kingdom. the domestication of cattle in africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside hunter gatherer cultures. the mau mau also known as the kenya land and freedom army were primarily kikuyu people. it is speculated that by 6000 bce cattle were domesticated in north africa. ceded sovereignty over the colony of kenya. by the first millennium bce ironworking had been introduced in northern africa. the inland shipping fleet of the netherlands is the largest in europe. it is the largest of four constituent countries of the kingdom of the netherlands. the port of rotterdam is the busiest seaport in europe. the four largest cities in the netherlands are amsterdam rotterdam the hague and utrecht. schiphol is the busiest airport in the netherlands and the third busiest in europe. the netherlands has been a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with a unitary structure since 1848. the frankish carolingian empire modelled itself on the roman empire and controlled much of western europe. the netherlands allowed women s suffrage in 1919 and was the first country to legalise same sex marriage in 2001. amsterdam is the 5th busiest tourist destination in europe with more than 4. in most romance languages the term "low countries" is officially used as the name for the netherlands. 2 million inhabitants and is the 5th largest metropolitan area in europe. holland and dutch the netherlands is informally referred to as holland in various languages including dutch and english. europe covers about 10. in other languages holland is the formal name for the netherlands. europe had a total population of about 745 million about 10% of the world population in 2021. holland can also refer to a region within the netherlands that consists of north and south holland. since the age of discovery started by spain and portugal europe played a predominant role in global affairs. the duke of alba ruthlessly attempted to suppress the protestant movement in the netherlands. definition contemporary definition the prevalent definition of europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid 19th century. the union of utrecht is seen as the foundation of the modern netherlands. "europe" as used specifically in british english may also refer to continental europe exclusively. many economic historians regard the netherlands as the first thoroughly capitalist country in the world. such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term europe by its users. however the southern netherlands had been culturally separate from the north since 1581 and rebelled. instead the concept of "western civilization" emerged as a way of grouping together europe and these colonies. the netherlands abolished slavery in its colonies in 1863. 8 million years ago in georgia is the earliest hominin to have been discovered in europe. that changed in world war ii when nazi germany invaded the netherlands on 10 may 1940. the neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans cro magnons who appeared in europe around 43 000 to 40 000 years ago. political collaborators were members of the fascist nsb the only legal political party in the occupied netherlands. homo sapiens arrived in europe around 54 000 years ago some 10 000 years earlier than previously thought. after the war the netherlands left behind an era of neutrality and gained closer ties with neighbouring states. the earliest sites in europe dated 48 000 years ago are riparo mochi italy geissenklösterle germany and isturitz france . the netherlands was one of the founding members of benelux and nato. 3200 bce in greece with the minoan civilisation on crete the first advanced civilisation in europe. in 2002 the euro was introduced as fiat money and in 2010 the netherlands antilles was dissolved. east central europe saw the creation of the first slavic states and the adoption of christianity c. the special municipalities are collectively known as the caribbean netherlands. feudalism developed in france in the early middle ages and soon spread throughout europe. the ice sheet halted as it covered the eastern half of the netherlands. through monasteries and cathedral schools the church was responsible for education in much of europe. bombay veterinary college now mumbai veterinary college is the oldest and premier veterinary college of india and asia. mumbai lies on the konkan coast on the west coast of india and has a deep natural harbour. the primary education system of the mcgm is the largest urban primary education system in asia. in 2008 mumbai was named an alpha world city. asia listen also uk is a continent which is part of eurasia. the seven islands that constitute mumbai were earlier home to communities of marathi language speaking koli people. the border between asia and europe was historically defined by european academics. mumbai is the financial commercial and the entertainment capital of india. asia–oceania boundary the border between asia and the region of oceania is usually placed somewhere in the malay archipelago. the government of india officially changed the english name to mumbai in november 1995. asia does not exactly correspond to the cultural borders of its various types of constituents. industrial development began in mumbai. one of the first classical writers to use asia as a name of the whole continent was pliny. in 1954 hindustan petroleum comissoned mumbai refinery at trombay and bpcl refinery. classical antiquity latin asia and greek ἀσία appear to be the same word. mumbai is the commercial capital of india and has evolved into a global financial hub. roman authors translated ἀσία as asia. navi mumbai is east of thane creek and thane is north of vasai creek. there was an asia minor and an asia major located in modern day iraq. the city district region is also commonly referred to as the island city or south mumbai. many of these are geographic doris rhodea europa asia. the total area of mumbai is 603. asia is generally defined as comprising the eastern four fifths of eurasia. 71 km2 169 sq mi under the administration of municipal corporation of greater mumbai mcgm . tropical rainforests stretch across much of southern asia and coniferous and deciduous forests lie farther north. mumbai is bounded by the arabian sea to the west. main regions there are various approaches to the regional division of asia. mumbai sits on a seismically active zone owing to the presence of 23 fault lines in the vicinity. climates range from arctic and subarctic in siberia to tropical in southern india and southeast asia. between june and september the south west monsoon rains occur in mumbai. some of the largest daily temperature ranges on earth occur in western sections of asia. the storm reportedly impacted mumbai for 20 hours and left the city devastated. according to citigroup 9 of 11 global growth generators countries came from asia driven by population and income growth. air pollution air pollution is a major issue in mumbai. asia has three main financial centers hong kong tokyo and singapore. recent estimates of the economy of the mumbai metropolitan region is estimated to be $606. in 2010 asia had 3. as of 2022 mumbai is home to the eighth highest number of billionaires of any city. last year asia had toppled europe. the two revenue districts of mumbai come under the jurisdiction of a district collector. abrahamic the abrahamic religions including judaism christianity islam druze faith and baháʼí faith originated in west asia. in 1907 nairobi replaced mombasa as the capital of the east africa protectorate. perhaps the most famous book and film set in nairobi is out of africa. many foreign musicians who tour africa perform in nairobi. bob marley s first ever visit to africa started in nairobi. the broadcast headquarters of cctv africa are located in nairobi. nairobi ny roh bee is the capital and largest city of kenya. it had the largest halls in eastern and central africa. after independence in 1963 nairobi became the capital of the republic of kenya. in 1985 out of africa was made into a film directed by sydney pollack. nairobi is an established hub for business and culture. the complex was completed in 1987 and was used to host the 1987 all africa games. it also contains the nairobi national park. the catholic university of eastern africa located in langata suburb obtained its "letter of interim authority" in 1989. nairobi joined the unesco global network of learning cities in 2010. africa is the world s second largest and second most populous continent after asia in both cases. history early years the site of nairobi was originally part of an uninhabited swamp. these entrenched environmental concerns are expected to worsen as climate change impacts africa. in 1919 nairobi was declared to be a municipality. the un intergovernmental panel on climate change has identified africa as the continent most vulnerable to climate change. growth in 1921 nairobi had 24 000 residents of which 12 000 were native africans. the history of africa is long complex and has often been under appreciated by the global historical community. on 11 august 2020 nairobi county assembly speaker beatrice elachi resigned. early human civilizations such as ancient egypt and carthage emerged in north africa. as nairobi is adjacent to the eastern edge of the rift valley minor earthquakes and tremors occasionally occur. most present states in africa emerged from a process of decolonisation following world war ii. climate under the köppen climate classification nairobi has a subtropical highland climate cwb . africa would be for the egyptians "the birthplace. as nairobi is situated close to the equator the differences between the seasons are minimal. a major climatic recession occurred lessening the heavy and persistent rains in central and eastern africa. the main administrative divisions of nairobi are central dagoretti embakasi kasarani kibera makadara pumwani and westlands. the domestication of cattle in africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside hunter gatherer cultures. the low and lower income estates are located mainly in far eastern nairobi. it is speculated that by 6000 bce cattle were domesticated in north africa. more than 90% of nairobi residents work within the nairobi metropolitan area in the formal and informal sectors. by the first millennium bce ironworking had been introduced in northern africa. kibera slum the kibera slum in nairobi is claimed by the kenyan government to have a population of 185 777. european exploration of africa began with the ancient greeks and romans. the most famous park in nairobi is uhuru park. in the early 7th century the newly formed arabian islamic caliphate expanded into egypt and then into north africa. other notable open spaces include jeevanjee gardens city park 7 august memorial park and nairobi arboretum. islamic north africa had become diverse and a hub for mystics scholars jurists and philosophers. maharastra has highest number of followers of buddhism who account for 5. bombay high court is located in mumbai. the key demand of the samiti called for a marathi speaking state with mumbai as its capital. uttar pradesh gujarat and karnataka account for the largest percentage of migrants to the mumbai metropolitan area. the hindi language is spoken mainly in the mumbai city district 26% mumbai suburban district 25. gujrati is spoken mainly in mumbai city district 20. 53% and mumbai suburban district 18. india s main stock exchanges and capital market and commodity exchanges are located in mumbai. mumbai has the largest share in gsdp 19. marathi films used to be previously made primarily in kolhapur but now are produced in mumbai. the first passenger train in india ran from mumbai to thane on 16 april 1853. konkan railway is headquartered in navi mumbai. the mumbai rajdhani express the fastest rajdhani train connects the indian capital of new delhi to mumbai. maha metro is responsible for the implementation of all maharashtra state metro projects except the mumbai metropolitan region. mumbai metro is operational since 8 june 2014. mumbai has an iit has national institute of industrial engineering and nagpur has iim and aiims. the biggest form of indian popular music is songs from films produced in mumbai. most the influential music composers and singers have called mumbai their home. in 2006 the symphony orchestra of india was founded housed at the ncpa in mumbai. mumbai is called home by writers in english such as rohinton mistry shobha de and salman rushdie. their novels are set with mumbai as the backdrop. the marathi film industry initially located in kolhapur has spread throughout mumbai. mumbai has numerous film production studios and facilities to produce films. air india s commercially successful air channel vividh bharti is headquartered in mumbai. maharashtra is represented by three teams in domestic cricket namely maharashtra mumbai and vidarbha cricket team. they are governed by maharashtra cricket association mumbai cricket association and vidarbha cricket association respectively. governing body of cricket in india bcci has its headquarters in mumbai. mumbai and pune hold derby races at the mahalaxmi racecourse and pune race course respectively. many national level football club are based in this state such as mumbai tigers f. bengal mumbai fc and air india fc. mumbai gladiators and pune marathas are teams based in mumbai and pune respectively. puneri paltan u mumba pro kabbadi league teams are based in pune and mumbai respectively. the most popular or well known are mumbai city ajanta ellora and the nature reserves in the state. mumbai lies on the konkan coast on the west coast of india and has a deep natural harbour. in 2008 mumbai was named an alpha world city. the seven islands that constitute mumbai were earlier home to communities of marathi language speaking koli people. mumbai is the financial commercial and the entertainment capital of india. the government of india officially changed the english name to mumbai in november 1995. industrial development began in mumbai. in 1954 hindustan petroleum comissoned mumbai refinery at trombay and bpcl refinery. with 61 130 704 inhabitants at the 2011 census karnataka is the eighth largest state by population comprising 31 districts. its capital and largest city is bengaluru. karnataka also contains some of the only villages in india where sanskrit is primarily spoken. on 27 september 2006 the bruhat bengaluru mahanagara palike bbmp passed a resolution to implement the name change. karnataka has contributed significantly to both forms of indian classical music the carnatic and hindustani traditions. the indian super league club bengaluru fc are based in the city. the economy of karnataka is the fifth largest of any indian state with ₹20. the bengaluru bulls is one of the teams in this league. karnataka has the nineteenth highest ranking among indian states in human development index. four centuries of satavahana rule followed allowing them to control large areas of karnataka. most of these rivers flow out of karnataka eastward reaching the sea at the bay of bengal. about 38 284 km2 14 782 sq mi of karnataka i. meteorologically karnataka is divided into three zones – coastal north interior and south interior. many regions of karnataka are as yet unexplored so new species of flora and fauna are found periodically. the western ghats a biodiversity hotspot includes the western region of karnataka. karnataka has five national parks anshi bandipur bannerghatta kudremukh and nagarhole. wildlife in karnataka is threatened by poaching habitat destruction human wildlife conflict and pollution. sub divisions there are 31 districts in karnataka. demographics according to the 2011 census of india the total population of karnataka was 61 095 297 of which 30 966 657 50. religion adi shankaracharya 788–820 chose sringeri in karnataka to establish the first of his four mathas monastery . he came to karnataka in 1098 ce and lived here until 1122 ce. the jain philosophy and literature have contributed immensely to the religious and cultural landscape of karnataka. christianity reached karnataka in the sixteenth century with the arrival of the portuguese and st. buddhism was popular in karnataka during the first millennium in places such as gulbarga and banavasi. there are tibetan refugee camps in karnataka. bangalore karaga celebrated in the heart of bangalore is the second most important festival celebrated in karnataka. 84% is a major language in areas bordering andhra pradesh and karnataka as well as bangalore while tamil 3. some of the regional languages in karnataka are tulu kodava konkani and beary. the official emblem of karnataka has a ganda berunda in the centre. 04% karnataka is on the 6th position among all states and union territories. in an employment survey conducted for the year 2013–2014 the unemployment rate in karnataka was 1. in 2011–2012 karnataka had an estimated poverty ratio of 20. nearly 56% of the workforce in karnataka is engaged in agriculture and related activities. since the 1980s karnataka has emerged as the pan indian leader in the field of it information technology . in 2007 there were nearly 2 000 firms operating in karnataka. karnataka also leads the nation in biotechnology. apart from kannadigas karnataka is home to tuluvas kodavas and konkanis. minor populations of tibetan buddhists and tribes like the soligas yeravas todas and siddhis also live in karnataka. gamaka is another classical music genre based on carnatic music that is practised in karnataka. chitrakala parishat is an organisation in karnataka dedicated to promoting painting mainly in the mysore painting style. during the 18th century and the british raj telangana was ruled by the nizam of hyderabad. the movement continued in hyderabad and other districts of telangana. the hyderabad police is a division of the telangana police under the state home ministry. the telugu dialect spoken in hyderabad is called telangana mandalika and the urdu spoken is called deccani. as of 2019 the state of telangana is divided into 33 districts. the hyderabad state joined the union of india in 1948 after a police action. the economy of telangana is the seventh largest in india with a gross state domestic product gsdp of ₹9. he named the area hyderabad deccan. telangana ranks 22nd among indian states in human development index. subsequent rulers retained the title nizam ul mulk and were called asif jahi nizams or nizams of hyderabad. during the early seventeenth century a strong cotton weaving industry existed in telangana. in 1769 hyderabad city became the formal capital of the nizams. the medak and warangal divisions of telangana were part of their realm. hyderabad state became a princely state among the presidencies and provinces of british india. in 1787 heavy flooding killed over 20 000 causing a plague which killed about 10 656 000 telugus again in telangana. the government of india annexed hyderabad state on 17 september 1948 after a military operation called operation polo. telangana rebellion the telangana rebellion was a peasant revolt supported by the communists. vellodi as first chief minister of hyderabad state on 26 january 1950. after reorganisation in 1956 the region of telangana was merged with andhra state to form andhra pradesh. burgula ramakrishna rao was elected chief minister of the hyderabad state in its first democratic election. on 9 december 2009 the government of india announced the process of formation of the telangana state. ecology the central deccan plateau dry deciduous forests ecoregion covers much of the state including hyderabad. the state of telangana was officially formed on 2 june 2014. hyderabad district has the highest literacy rate with 80. about 75% of the population of telangana speak telugu and 12% speak urdu. hyderabad is the biggest city in the state and 4th largest city in india. 1% of the population aged 3–35 years received free education at pre primary and higher levels in telangana. the judiciary is composed of the high court of judicature at hyderabad and a system of lower courts. economy the economy of telangana is mainly driven by agriculture. industries several major manufacturing and services industries are in operation mainly around hyderabad. farmers in telangana mainly depend on rain fed water sources for irrigation. in terms of services hyderabad is nicknamed "cyberabad" due to the location of major software industries in the city. telangana is one of top it exporting states of india. reddy s laboratories shantha biotechnics and aragen formerly gvk bio are based out of hyderabad. telangana is a mineral rich state with coal reserves at singareni collieries company. s in hyderabad is one of the largest bus stand in asia. because of this cotton farmers in telangana are at risk for “suicide and indebtedness”. railways the history of railways in this region dates back to the time of nizam of hyderabad in 1874. tourism telangana state tourism development corporation tstdc is a state government agency which promotes tourism in telangana. secunderabad and hyderabad are the main divisions of the south central railway that fall in the state. thereafter bhubaneswar became the capital of odisha. bhubaneswar odia [ˈbʱubɔneswɔɾɔ ɕwɔɾ] listen is the capital and largest city of the indian state of odisha. bhubaneswar and rourkela are the two cities in smart city mission from odisha. the legislative assembly of odisha was shifted from cuttack to bhubaneswar in 1949. utkal university bhubaneswar is the oldest university in odisha and the 17th oldest university in india. the headquarters of the odisha state road transport corporation osrtc is in bhubaneswar. ratha yatra "temple car festival " is the most important festival in odisha and bhubaneswar. in modern times bhubaneswar hosts a literary festival the odisha literary fest. bhubaneswar has a franchise of odisha premier league bhubaneswar jaguars which started in 2010. odisha has a coastline of 485 kilometres 301 mi along the bay of bengal in indian ocean. yayati ii is supposed to have built the lingaraj temple at bhubaneswar. the language of odisha is odia which is one of the classical languages of india. the chandaka elephant sanctuary is a 190 km2 protected area near the capital city bhubaneswar. the economy of odisha is the 16th largest state economy in india with ₹5. the capital and largest city of the state is bhubaneswar. odisha ranks 32nd among indian states in human development index. bhubaneswar is well connected by air rail and road with the rest of india. the sabar people of odisha have also been mentioned in the mahabharata. bhubaneswar is dubbed the "temple city" a nickname earned because of the 700 temples which once stood there. in 1803 the british ousted the marathas from the puri cuttack region of odisha during the second anglo maratha war. bhubaneswar replaced cuttack as the capital on 19 august 1949 two years after india gained its independence from britain. the northern and western districts of odisha were incorporated into the bengal presidency. bhubaneswar and cuttack are often referred to as the twin cities of odisha . odisha also has plateaus and rolling uplands which have lower elevation than the plateaus. dhauli near bhubaneswar was the site of the kalinga war c. chilika lake is a brackish water lagoon on the east coast of odisha with an area of 1 105 km2. his hathigumpha inscription is located at the udayagiri and khandagiri caves near bhubaneswar. legislative assembly the odisha state has a unicameral legislature. their capital kalinganagara was located in present day bhubaneswar city. the judiciary is composed of the odisha high court located at cuttack and a system of lower courts. most of the older temples in bhubaneswar were built between 8th and 12th centuries under shaiva influence. odisha has 58 sub divisions 317 tahasils and 314 blocks. by the 1991 census the population of bhubaneswar had increased to 411 542. municipal corporations in odisha include bhubaneswar cuttack berhampur sambalpur and rourkela. accordingly on 14 august 1994 the bhubaneswar municipal corporation was established. odisha has emerged as the most preferred destination for overseas investors with investment proposals. bhubaneswar is topographically divided into western uplands and eastern lowlands with hillocks in the western and northern parts. bandhabahal is a major area of open cast coal mines in odisha. the area under the jurisdiction of the bhubaneswar municipal corporation covers 186 square kilometres 72 sq mi . demographics according to the 2011 census of india the total population of odisha is 41 974 218 of which 21 212 136 50. the master planning branch of the bhubaneswar development authority developed the comprehensive development plan cdp in 2010. the first capital of gujarat was ahmedabad the capital was moved to gandhinagar in 1970. the gujarat national law university situated at gandhinagar is the 5th best law school currently in india. gandhinagar gujarati [ˈgɑːndʱinəgəɾ] listen is the capital of the state of gujarat in india. the 20 543 km2 area around gandhinagar is defined by gujarat capital territory. gandhinagar is a political hub for the state of gujarat. gujarat gujarati [ˈɡudʒəɾat̪] listen is a state along the western coast of india. the capital gandhinagar is a planned city. along with bihar mizoram and nagaland gujarat is one of four indian states to prohibit the sale of alcohol. the akshardham temple is located in gandhinagar. the economy of gujarat is the fourth largest in india with a gross state domestic product gsdp of ₹16. demographics according to the 2011 census of india gandhinagar had a population of 208 299. gujarat ranks 21st among indian states and union territories in human development index. gandhinagar has an average literacy rate of 90%. etymology gujarat is derived from the pratihara dynasty who ruled gujarat in the 8th and 9th centuries ce. over 95% of the population of gandhinagar are hindus. altogether about fifty indus valley settlement ruins have been discovered in gujarat. gandhinagar spans an area of 326 km2 126 sq mi . the ancient history of gujarat was enriched by the commercial activities of its inhabitants. gandhinagar is india s tree capital with 54% green cover on its land area. the kshatrapa dynasty was replaced by the gupta empire with the conquest of gujarat by chandragupta vikramaditya. the current member of the lok sabha for gandhinagar is amit shah from the bharatiya janata party bjp . after this victory the arab invaders were driven out of gujarat. many trains running on the western zones pass through gandhinagar. the chaulukya dynasty ruled gujarat from c. 8 km long network connecting gandhinagar with ahmedabad is being constructed. karandev of the vaghela dynasty was the last hindu ruler of gujarat. to 16th century european observers gujarat was a fabulously wealthy country. the conquest of the kingdom of gujarat marked a significant event of akbar s reign. muhammad azam was then the subedar governor of gujarat. these attacks marked the entry of the marathas into gujarat. the peshwas had established sovereignty over parts of gujarat and collected taxes and tributes through their representatives. pilaji gaekwad first ruler of gaekwad dynasty established the control over baroda and other parts of gujarat. an epidemic outbreak in 1812 killed half the population of gujarat. gujarat was also known as pratichya and varuna. the narmada is the largest river in gujarat followed by the tapi. apart from this the gir hills barda jessore and chotila together make up a large minority of gujarat. extant species according to the india state of forest report 2011 gujarat has 9. gujarat has four national parks and 21 sanctuaries. they are spread across the large plains of saurashtra and the mountains of south gujarat. demographics the population of gujarat was 60 439 692 31 491 260 males and 28 948 432 females according to the 2011 census data. the literary activity was not confined to patna alone but to other districts of bihar. 1928 patna women s college bihar veterinary college est. following the partition of bengal presidency in 1912 patna became the capital of bihar and orissa province. the patna high court has jurisdiction over the state of bihar. the patna police commanded by senior superintendent of police is overseen by the bihar government s home department. the literary activity was not confined to patna alone but to many districts of bihar. magahi parishad established in patna in 1952 pioneered magadhi journalism in bihar. bihar and orissa district gazetteers patna. bihar hindi pronunciation [bɪˈɦaːr] listen is a state in eastern india. the tenth and the last guru of sikhism guru gobind singh was born in patna in 1666. the bihar plain is split by the river ganges which flows from west to east. all the branches of the government are located in the state capital patna. on 15 november 2000 southern bihar was ceded to form the new state of jharkhand. dramas incorporating this theme continue to be popular in the theatres of patna. only 20% of the population of bihar lives in urban areas as of 2021. bodh gaya in gaya district is about 96 km 60 mi from patna. etymology the name bihar derives from the sanskrit and pali word vihāra devanagari विहार meaning "abode". patna metro with network of 31 km 19 mi length is under construction as of 2022. the maurya empire and the religion of buddhism arose in the region that now makes up modern bihar. gaighat in patna has a permanent terminal of inland waterways for handling cargo vessels. bihar and bengal were invaded by rajendra chola i of the chola dynasty in the 11th century. patna university the seventh oldest university of the indian subcontinent was established in 1917. a number of agriculture based industries had been started in bihar by foreign entrepreneurs. some other centres of high learning established under british rule are patna college est. the ganges flows west–east and along with its tributaries regularly floods parts of the bihar plain. 1925 now patna medical college and hospital science college patna est. bihar has notified forest area of 6 764. with institute like super 30 patna has emerged as a major center for engineering and civil services coaching. bihar has an average daily high temperature of only 26 °c with a yearly average of 26 °c. according to the united nations as of 2018 patna had a population of 2. other species in bihar include leopard bear hyena bison chital and barking deer. patna serves as the seat of patna high court. demographics at the 2011 census bihar was the third most populous state of india with a total population of 104 099 452. the modern city of patna is mainly on the southern bank of the river ganges. in 2021 bihar has had an urbanisation rate of 20%. with the fall of the gupta empire patna lost its glory. bihar has an adult literacy rate of 68. patna registered an average annual growth of 3. 02% is minority in religion in bihar. as of 2011 12 gdp per capita of patna is ₹1 08 657 and its gdp growth rate is 7. raipur pronunciation is the capital city of the indian state of chhattisgarh. other governing agencies that are active in the city of raipur is the urban administration and development chhattisgarh. chhattisgarh hindi [ˈtʃʰət̪ːiːsgəɽʱ] is a landlocked state in central india. raipur gained prominence over the capital ratanpur with the advent of the british in 1845. chhattisgarh is one of the fastest developing states in india. today raipur has become the centre of the steel sector the biggest market for steel in india. in ancient times chhattisgarh region had been part of the chedi dynasty of kalinga in modern odisha. india s first man made jungle safari is also situated in raipur. they came under british rule from 1845 to 1947 as the chhattisgarh division of the central provinces. raipur is also regarded as one of the best cities to do business. a discussion about forming a regional congress organisation for chhattisgarh took place. in addition raipur also has over 800 rice milling plants. as such chhattisgarh was formed from madhya pradesh. raipur district was once part of southern kosal and considered to be under the maurya empire. the outline of chhattisgarh is like a sea horse. another story about raipur is that king ramachandra s son brahmdeo rai had established the city. the natural environment of koriya in chhattisgarh includes forests mountains rivers and waterfalls. after independence the raipur district was included in the central provinces and berar. chirimiri is one of the most popular places known for its natural environment and climate in chhattisgarh. on the south of raipur lies the deccan plateau. summer temperatures in chhattisgarh can reach up to 49 °c 113 °f . it was initially established by the british on 17 may 1867 initially named raipur municipal committee. chhattisgarh receives an average of 1 292 millimetres 50. it was upgraded to raipur municipal corporation in the year 1973. the state has the highest freight loading in the country and one sixth of indian railway s revenue comes from chhattisgarh. the municipal commissioner of raipur is shri. there is a lack of passenger services to north and south of chhattisgarh. there are 70 wards and 8 zones within the raipur municipal corporation. major railway stations of chhattisgarh bilaspur junction durg junction raipur junction ambikapur raigarh korba champa junction mahasamund rajnandgaon dongargarh gevra road pendra road air the air infrastructure in chhattisgarh is improving. the city is a part of raipur district with s. there are 11 members of the lok sabha from chhattisgarh. sunil kumar soni bjp is raipur city s mp. the economy of chhattisgarh recorded a growth rate of 6. there are three mla constituencies in raipur city and one constituency for raipur rural. in the mid 1990s most of chhattisgarh was still a monocrop belt. the respective mlas of the three constituencies are raipur city south mla is mr. chhattisgarh is also called the "rice bowl of central india". brijmohan agrawal bjp for raipur city north it is mr. in chhattisgarh region about 22% of net cropped area was under irrigation as compared to 36. kuldeep juneja inc and for raipur city west it is mr. the assam trunk road and the g s road passes through dispur. assam covers an area of 78 438 km2 30 285 sq mi . next to dispur is the township of jatia. assam is known for assam tea and assam silk. monsoon season in dispur commences from the month of june. mughals used asham and the british province too was called assam. dispur monsoons are usually accompanied by severe thunderstorms along with heavy downpours. ahom kingdom early period the ahoms a tai group ruled upper assam. bjp s atul bora is the incumbent mla of dispur vidhan sabha constituency . colonial era the discovery of camellia sinensis in 1834 in assam was followed by testing in 1836–37 in london. basistha ashram is six kilometres from dispur. and ahom occupied assam was captured by the burmese. see also tourism in north east india beltola references external links dispur travel guide from wikivoyage dispur news headlines about dispur. the assam postage circle was established by 1873 under the headship of the deputy post master general. assam province was one among the major eight provinces of british india. with the partition of india in 1947 assam became a constituent state of india. since the restructuring of assam after independence communal tensions and violence remain. in 1961 the government of assam passed legislation making use of the assamese language compulsory. deluges places in assam. for the state bird the white winged wood duck assam is a globally important area. a land of high rainfall assam displays greenery. flora assam is remarkably rich in orchid species and the foxtail orchid is the state flower of assam. 34×1010 m3 of gas and 67 million barrels 10 700 000 m3 of natural gas liquids in the assam geologic province. demographics population the total population of assam was 26. as per the 2011 census the total population of assam was 31 169 272. in 2001 the census had recorded literacy in assam at 63. the growth of population in assam has increased since the middle decades of the 20th century. the people of india project has studied 115 of the ethnic groups in assam. the scheduled tribe population in assam is around 13% of which bodos account for 40%. the population of the brahmaputra valley is 27 580 977 according to the 2011 census report by the assam government. bodo is an ancient language of assam. bodo is now spoken largely in the western assam. it is official language of the bodoland territorial region and co official language of the state of assam. there are speakers of tai languages in assam. a total of six tai languages were spoken in assam. administrative districts the 31 administrative districts of assam are delineated based on geographic features such as rivers hills and forests. with the announcement made by governor jagdish mukhi it has become the 34th district of assam. there are now 2489 village panchayats covering 26247 villages in assam. social issues inter state dispute according to assam government assam has border dispute with four states namely mizoram meghalaya nagaland arunachal pradesh. a tripartite committee had recommended that certain territories be transferred from assam to arunachal. the seat of the goa legislative assembly is in porvorim across the mandovi from panaji. fontainhas in panaji has been declared a cultural quarter showcasing the life architecture and culture of goa. the goa science centre is in miramar panaji. panaji is also the administrative headquarters of north goa district. education goa s only university the goa university is situated at taleigão on the outskirts of panaji. panaji is part of panaji goa assembly constituency and north goa lok sabha constituency . and sporting clube de goa are based in panaji and they both compete in india s top tier league i league. other historical names for goa are sindapur sandabur and mahassapatam. panaji is the state s capital while vasco da gama is its largest city. history prehistory rock art engravings found in goa are one of the earliest known traces of human life in india. there is also an educational radio channel gyan vani run by ignou broadcast from panaji at 107. buddhist monks laid the foundation of buddhism in goa. goa institute of management located at sanquelim near panaji is one of india s premier business schools. between the 2nd century bc and the 6th century ad goa was ruled by the bhojas of goa. in large towns such as panaji and margao intra city buses operate. they patronised jainism in goa. nh 768 ex nh 4a links panaji and ponda to belgaum and nh 4. in 1312 goa came under the governance of the delhi sultanate. there was also a short lived catamaran service linking mumbai and panaji operated by damania shipping in the 1990s. they set up a permanent settlement in velha goa old goa . demographics during the 2011 census of india panaji had a population of 114 405. the goa inquisition a formal tribunal was established in 1560 and was finally abolished in 1812. the climate in panaji is hot in summer and equable in winter. goa has a coastline of 160 km 99 mi . goa is famous for its beaches and miramar bambolim and dona paula are three popular beaches located near panaji. goa has more than 40 estuarine eight marine and about 90 riverine islands. inez near panaji. a specimen of the rock is exhibited at goa university. media and communications state owned all india radio has a local station in panaji which transmits various programs of mass interest. subdivisions the state is divided into two civil districts—north goa and south goa. the annual international film festival of india iffi is held in panaji. panaji panjim is the headquarters of north goa district and is also the capital of goa. 2 mi from panaji. margao madgaon is the headquarters of the south goa district. the corporation of the city of panaji ccp administers the city and its mayor is rohit monserrate. it is also the cultural and commercial capital of goa. panaji panjim has the only municipal corporation in goa. goa has a total number of 334 villages. goa has a unicameral legislature the goa legislative assembly of 40 members headed by a speaker. nanda lake is the first and the only ramsar wetland site in goa. jaipur listen hindi jayapura formerly jeypore is the capital and largest city of the indian state of rajasthan. after independence in 1947 jaipur was made the capital of the newly formed state of rajasthan. law and order the city police in jaipur is under the jurisdiction of the rajasthan state department. jaipur also falls under the jaipur district of the state of rajasthan in western india. electricity in jaipur city is supplied through jaipur vidyut vitaran nigam ltd jvvnl by the government of rajasthan. the government of rajasthan have built asia s largest incubator in jaipur – the bhamashah techno hub. rajasthan hindi [raːdʒəsˈtʰaːn] listen lit. its capital and largest city is jaipur. the economy of rajasthan is the seventh largest state economy in india with ₹10. north of hadoti and mewar lies the dhundhar region home to the state capital of jaipur. rajasthan ranks 29th among indian states in human development index. jain pustak mandir jaipur. the oldest reference to rajasthan is found in a stone inscription dated back to 625 ce. jaipur is also known as the pink city due to the dominant colour scheme of its buildings. history ancient parts of what is now rajasthan were partly part of the vedic civilisation and the indus valley civilization. during the british colonial period the city served as the capital of jaipur state. after the defeat of chauhan in 1192 ce a part of rajasthan came under muslim rulers. jai singh consulted several books on architecture and architects while planning the layout of jaipur. at the beginning of the 13th century the most prominent and powerful state of rajasthan was mewar. demographics according to the provisional report of 2011 census jaipur city had a population of 3 073 350. rana hammir singh defeated the tughlaq dynasty and recovered a large portion of rajasthan. languages the official language of jaipur is hindi and the additional official language is english. after rana sanga s death marwar rose as a power center in rajasthan under rao maldev rathore. governance and politics civic administration the jaipur municipal corporation jmc was established in the year 1994. about three fifths of rajasthan lies northwest of the aravallis leaving two fifths on the east and south direction. jmc was recently bifurcated into two municipal corporations namely greater jaipur municipal corporation and jaipur heritage municipal corporation. merta city lies in the geographical center of rajasthan. however elections for the 100 wards of jaipur heritage municipal corporation were held on 29 october 2020. eastern and southeastern rajasthan is drained by the banas and chambal rivers tributaries of the ganges. the current mayor of jaipur municipal corporation greater is smt. the northwestern portion of rajasthan is generally sandy and dry. somya gurjar since 10 november 2020 and the mayor for jaipur municipal corporation heritage is smt. government and politics the politics of rajasthan are dominated mainly by the bharatiya janata party and the indian national congress. the municipal commissioner of jaipur is mahendra soni ias . rajasthan is among the largest producers of edible oils in india and the second largest producer of oilseeds. the masterplan for the city 2025 was created by the jaipur development authority. rajasthan is also the biggest wool producing state in india and the main opium producer and consumer. legislative assembly and state agencies jaipur consists of two parliamentary constituencies jaipur and jaipur rural. the indira gandhi canal irrigates northwestern rajasthan. the political party with a majority in jaipur is the indian national congress. it is the second operational airport in state of jharkhand after ranchi. ranchi listen hindi [ˈrãːtʃiː] is the capital of the indian state of jharkhand. ranchi is also one of the oldest cities in jharkhand. jharkhand hindi [d͡ʒʱɑːɾkʰəɳɖ] lit. the city of ranchi is its capital and dumka its sub capital. jharkhand is primarily rural with about 24% of its population living in cities. thakur ani nath shahdeo built jagannath temple of ranchi in 1691. during the medieval period the region was known as jharkhand. the temperatures in ranchi in december usually vary from 10–24 °c 50–75 °f . according to bhavishya purana 1200 ce jharkhand was one of the seven pundra desa. the tagore hill is located in morabadi ranchi. forest land from baidhnath dham to puri was known as jharkhand. the brother of rabindranath tagore jyotirindranath tagore had made a tour at ranchi in the year 1908. during the age of mahajanpadas around 500 bce jharkhand state was a part of magadha and anga. 63% with ranchi district being most educated at 77. roy founded jharkhand mukti morcha. all the branches of the government are located in the state capital ranchi. nirmal mahto founded all jharkhand students union. all india radio also operates from ranchi. they led the movement for a separate state of jharkhand. today they are called central institute of psychiatry and ranchi institute of neuro psychiatry and allied sciences respectively. the jharkhand coordination committee jcc consisting of ram dayal munda b. ranchi is among six cities in hockey india league to be played in january 2013. keshri sent a memorandum to form jharkhand state in 1988. jagannath temple and ratu palace are some sights which witnessed the history of ranchi. central government formed a committee on the jharkhand matter in 1989. ranchi is rapidly growing its economy and certain parks special economic zones and industrial areas are being developed. the jharkhand area autonomous council bill passed in bihar legislative assembly in december 1994. ranchi is also nicknamed the city of waterfalls . the voting on jharkhand act was to be done on 21 september 1998 in bihar legislation. they attacked british in ranchi and compelled to flee them. later the name of the state was changed from vanachal to jharkhand. freedom fighter birsa munda died in the ranchi jail on 9 june 1900. jharkhand is also known for its vast forest resources. in 1912 jyotirindranath tagore the eldest brother of rabindranath tagore settled in ranchi. much of jharkhand lies on the chota nagpur plateau. after independence ranchi saw significant increase in its population. the higher watersheds of these rivers stretch out within the jharkhand state. ranchi became an administrative cum industrial town in 1958 when heavy engineering corporation was set up. much of the jharkhand state is still enclosed by forest. ranchi has an average literacy rate of 87. since 1984 the governor of punjab has served concurrently as the administrator of chandigarh. the predominant ethnolinguistic group of the punjab region are the punjabi people who speak the indo aryan punjabi language. chandigarh is a planned city in india. however eudemus who had served as alexander s satrap in the punjab region treacherously killed porus. etymology the name chandigarh is a compound of chandi and garh. around two centuries after defeating the indo greeks the kushans under kanishka conquered punjab. the government carved out chandigarh from about fifty puadhi speaking villages in the then state of east punjab india. as alexander never crossed the beas river so his territory probably lied in punjab region. shimla was the temporary capital of the state until chandigarh was completed. the mauryan military was also made up vastly of men from the punjab janapadas. chandigarh hosts the largest of le corbusier s many open hand sculptures standing 26 metres high. according to buddhist sources chanakya was native of the punjab who resided in taxila. present day chandigarh was also the site of a short lived late 18th century principality with a small fort at mani majra. he undertook military campaigns in punjab and captured chiniot and shorkot. the exact geographic coordinates of chandigarh are 30. the punjab with its rich farmlands became one of the most important colonial assets. the maximum amount of rain received by the city of chandigarh during the monsoon season is 195. at the time of partition in 1947 the province was split into east and west punjab. wildlife and biodiversity most of chandigarh is covered by dense banyan and eucalyptus plantations. east punjab 48% became part of india while west punjab 52% became part of pakistan. the parrot bird sanctuary chandigarh provides a home to a large number of parrots. sikh empire in the 19th century maharaja ranjit singh established the sikh empire based in the punjab. heritage trees of chandigarh many trees in chandigarh are given the status of the natural heritage of the city. the punjab was a region straddling india and the afghan durrani empire. the chandigarh government has identified a list of 31 trees as heritage trees. partition of british punjab the struggle for indian independence witnessed competing and conflicting interests in the punjab. chandigarh has a belt of parks running from sectors. religions background the punjabi people first practiced hinduism the oldest recorded religion in the punjab region. there is also a government museum and art gallery in sector 10 chandigarh. sikhism founded by guru nanak is the main religion practised in the post 1966 indian punjab state. chandigarh has an effective literacy rate of 86. 7% of the population of punjab state is sikh 38. the population of chandigarh forms 0. the punjab was home to several sufi saints and sufism is well established in the region. languages english is the sole official language of chandigarh. castes and tribes the punjab region is diverse. religion sikhism is the predominant religion of chandigarh followed by 80. economy the historical region of punjab produce a relatively high proportion of india and pakistan s food output respectively. chandi mandir mata mansa devi mandir and mata jayanti devi mandir are important hindu temples located near chandigarh. the agricultural output of the punjab region in pakistan contributes significantly to pakistan s gdp. most of the convent schools of chandigarh are governed by this institution. akash tripura is one of the first television channels in agartala. swami vivekananda stadium – another multi purpose stadium in the capital city of tripura in agartala. tripura bengali [ˈtri̯puraˈ] listen is a state in northeast india. it was moved to the new city of agartala in the 19th century. tripura has 19 different tribal communities with a majority of the bengali population. the agartala sabroom line was compled and fully operational since 2019. tripura has the highest number of primate species found in any indian state. a new railway line is being laid westwards from agartala to akhaura in bangladesh.  155  however it is unclear whether the extent of modern tripura is coterminous with kirat desh. a bus service exists between agartala and dhaka the capital of bangladesh. tripura remains peaceful as of 2016. 3 mi railway link between agartala and the akhaura junction of bangladesh. 86 sq mi tripura is the third smallest among the 29 states in the country behind goa and sikkim.  314 media and communication doordarshan dd has a television station in agartala.  4  a number of rivers originate in the hills of tripura and flow into bangladesh. the north eastern electric power corporation neepco operates the 84 mw agartala gas turbine power plant near agartala. flora and fauna like most of the indian subcontinent tripura lies within the indomalayan realm. in agartala. tripura hosts three different types of ecosystems mountain forest and freshwater. 1829–1849 of manikya dynasty to present old agartala by the bank of the river haora/saidra and was named haveli . herbaceous plants shrubs and trees such as albizia barringtonia lagerstroemia and macaranga flourish in the swamps of tripura. bir bikram kishore debbarman is called the founder of the planned city of agartala. administrative divisions in january 2012 major changes were implemented in the administrative divisions of tripura. the estimated population of agartala was 5 22 603 in 2014 after the municipal expansion 189 327 in the 2001 census . the tripura government has three branches executive legislature and judiciary. 84 km2 greater agartala is planned as of 2011 with an additional of 92 km2. the tripura legislative assembly consists of elected members and special office bearers that are elected by the members. the historical book rajmala contains incidents and historical stories of agartala. the judiciary is composed of the tripura high court and a system of lower courts. the total number of literates in agartala was 344 711 which constituted 86. tripura also has a unique tribal self governance body the tripura tribal areas autonomous district council. the effective literacy rate of 7+ population of agartala was 94. in 1988–93 the congress and tripura upajati juba samiti were in a ruling coalition. the sex ratio of agartala is 999 females per 1 000 males. tripura is an agrarian state with more than half of the population dependent on agriculture and allied activities. in 1941 agartala had a population of 17 693. tripura ranks second to kerala in the production of natural rubber in the country. banamalipur is an important business centre and a part of urban agartala which falls under the agartala post office. high quality timber including sal garjan teak and gamar are found abundantly in the forests of tripura. this is one of the most peaceful temples in agartala. as of 2011 thiruvananthapuram is the most populous city in kerala. thiruvananthapuram malayalam [t̪iɾuʋɐnɐn̪d̪ɐpuɾɐm] listen formerly known as trivandrum is the capital of the indian state of kerala. thiruvananthapuram became a prominent city in kerala under marthanda varma. when the state of kerala was formed on 1 november 1956 thiruvananthapuram became its capital. 83% thiruvananthapuram is the fastest growing district in kerala. the roads in the city are maintained by the thiruvananthapuram roads development company limited trdcl and kerala pwd. thiruvananthapuram central is the busiest railway station in kerala. most of the media houses in kerala are based in thiruvananthapuram. the kerala cricket association is headquartered in thiruvananthapuram. kerala english kerr ə lə malayalam [ke ɾɐɭɐm] listen is a state on the malabar coast of india. it is divided into 14 districts with the capital being thiruvananthapuram. spread over 38 863 km2 15 005 sq mi kerala is the 21st largest indian state by area. the municipality of thiruvananthapuram came into existence in 1920. with 33 million inhabitants as per the 2011 census kerala is the 13th largest indian state by population. the executive administration is based in thiruvananthapuram at state secretariat complex. the chera dynasty was the first prominent kingdom based in kerala. lulu international mall at thiruvananthapuram is the largest shopping mall in india. kerala has the lowest positive population growth rate in india 3. the corporation is divided into three zones north central and south with the headquarters in thiruvananthapuram kerala s capital city . kerala is the second most urbanised major state in the country with 47. thiruvananthapuram central tvc is the busiest railway station in the state. the economy of kerala is the 8th largest in india with ₹8. thiruvananthapuram airport shares civilian facilities with the southern air command of the indian air force. the earliest sanskrit text to mention kerala as cherapadha is the late vedic text aitareya aranyaka. the present regions that constitute thiruvananthapuram were ruled by the ays who were feudatories of the chera dynasty. kerala is also mentioned in the ramayana and the mahabharata the two hindu epics. the indian national congress had a very active presence in thiruvananthapuram. the greco roman trade map periplus maris erythraei refers to kerala as celobotra. the thiruvananthapuram municipality came into existence in 1920 as the first municipality in the travancore region. kerala was alternatively called malabar in the foreign trade circles. several establishments of the indian space research organisation isro were later established in thiruvananthapuram. there is a belief that once a year during the onam festival mahabali returns to kerala. thiruvananthapuram lies on the shores of karamana and killi rivers. then the last cheraman perumal divided kerala or chera kingdom among his chieftains and disappeared mysteriously. the thiruvananthapuram corporation is spread over 214. the kerala people never more heard any tidings of him. the wider thiruvananthapuram metropolitan area comprises thiruvananthapuram corporation three municipalities and 27 panchayats as of 2011. archaeological studies have identified mesolithic neolithic and megalithic sites in kerala. thiruvananthapuram is the headquarters of the southern air command sac of the indian air force. phoenicians established trade with kerala during this period. administration the corporation of thiruvananthapuram or tmc oversees and manages the civic infrastructure of the city s 100 wards. delhi has the second highest gdp per capita in india after goa . delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in india. delhi is often regarded as the "book capital" of india because of high readership. all india institute of medical sciences delhi is a premier medical school for treatment and research. national law university delhi is a prominent law school and is affiliated with the bar council of india. delhi hosted the nehru cup in 2007 and 2009 in both of which india defeated syria 1–0. india officially the republic of india hindi bhārat gaṇarājya is a country in south asia. delhi was the early centre of sufism and qawwali music. by 1200 bce an archaic form of sanskrit an indo european language had diffused into india from the northwest. major urdu poets from delhi include mir taqi mir and mirza ghalib. preserved by a resolutely vigilant oral tradition the rigveda records the dawning of hinduism in india. delhi was a major centre of the indian rebellion of 1857. the dravidian languages of india were supplanted in the northern and western regions. toponym there are a number of myths and legends associated with the origin of the name delhi. in the 15th century the vijayanagara empire created a long lasting composite hindu culture in south india. the people of delhi are referred to as delhiites or dilliwalas. india has been a federal republic since 1950 governed through a democratic parliamentary system. history ancient and early medieval periods traditionally seven cities have been associated with the region of delhi. among the socio economic challenges india faces are gender inequality child malnutrition and rising levels of air pollution. remains of several major cities can be found in delhi. temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as india underwent another urbanisation. the first of these was in the southern part of present day delhi. the sultanate was to control much of north india and to make many forays into south india. for the next three hundred years delhi was ruled by a succession of turkic and an afghan lodi dynasty. per the london declaration india retained its membership of the commonwealth becoming the first republic within it. they built several forts and townships that are part of the seven cities of delhi. the remaining indian plate survives as peninsular india the oldest and geologically most stable part of india. delhi was a major centre of sufism during this period. it extends as far north as the satpura and vindhya ranges in central india. the delhi sultanate reached its greatest extent during the reign of muhammad bin tughluq 1325–1351 . temperatures in india have risen by 0. delhi was captured and sacked by timur in 1398 who massacred 100 000 captive civilian. climate change in india is often thought to be the cause. delhi s decline continued under the sayyid dynasty 1414–1451 until the sultanate was reduced to delhi and its hinterland. india is a habitat for 8. a treaty signed in 1752 made marathas the protectors of the mughal throne in delhi. it predominates in the tropical moist forest of the andaman islands the western ghats and northeast india. then the marathas battled and won control of delhi from the mughals. still later mammals entered india from asia through two zoogeographical passes flanking the himalayas. the act gave delhi its legislative assembly along civil lines though with limited powers. one of the most important health institutions in serbia is the military medical academy in belgrade. following the serbian revolution belgrade was once again named the capital of serbia in 1841. being serbia s primate city belgrade has special administrative status within serbia. the northern regions of what is now serbia persisted as the serbian despotate with belgrade as its capital. in 1841 prince mihailo obrenović moved the capital of the principality of serbia from kragujevac to belgrade. however istanbul—the capital city of the state to which belgrade and serbia de jure still belonged—underwent similar changes. serbia without kosovo has about 6. its capital belgrade is also the largest city. serbia formally adheres to the policy of military neutrality. from 1521 to 1552 ottomans conquered belgrade and regions of syrmia bačka and banat. etymology the origin of the name serbia is unclear. those gains were lost by the treaty of belgrade in 1739 when the ottomans retook the region. from 1815 to 1882 the official name for serbia was the principality of serbia. 1% in belgrade alone. this was again renamed the socialist republic of serbia from 1963 to 1990. the belgrade stock exchange is the only stock exchange in the country with market capitalisation of $8. since 1990 the official name of the country has been the republic of serbia. the train travels 36 minutes from belgrade to novi sad. history prehistory and antiquity archaeological evidence of paleolithic settlements on the territory of present day serbia is scarce. city break and conference tourism is developed in belgrade and novi sad. when the roman empire was divided in 395 most of serbia remained under the eastern roman empire. belgrade bel grayd bel grayd serbian београд / beograd lit. by the beginning of the 9th century serbia achieved a level of statehood. the population of the belgrade metropolitan area is 1 685 563 according to the 2022 census. christianization of serbia was a gradual process finalized by the middle of the 9th century. in 1521 belgrade was conquered by the ottomans and became the seat of the sanjak of smederevo. much of central serbia switched from ottoman rule to habsburg control 1686–91 during the habsburg ottoman war 1683–1699 . belgrade was the capital of yugoslavia from its creation in 1918 to its dissolution in 2006. in 1718–39 the habsburg monarchy occupied much of central serbia and established the kingdom of serbia as crownland. belgrade is classified as a beta global city. likewise serbia was one of the first nations in the balkans to abolish feudalism. in 34–33 bc the roman army reached belgrade. in 1882 principality of serbia became the kingdom of serbia ruled by king milan i. basil ii 976–1025 installed a garrison in belgrade. despite initial success it was eventually overpowered by the central powers in 1915 and austro hungarian occupation of serbia followed. dragutin hungarian dragutin istván is regarded as the first serbian king to rule over belgrade. serbia was occupied by the central powers. in 1427 stefan s successor đurađ branković returning belgrade to the hungarian king made smederevo his new capital. serbia suffered the biggest casualty rate in world war i. principality and kingdom of serbia at the beginning of the 19th century belgrade was predominantly inhabited by a muslim population. military the armed forces of spain are known as the spanish armed forces fuerzas armadas españolas . centralisation and further state building in mainland spain ensued in the 18th century with the bourbon reforms. the spanish colonisation of the americas started with the colonisation of the caribbean. spain has the twelfth highest life expectancy in the world. miscegenation was the rule between the native and the spanish cultures and people. phiros was a grecian by birth but who had been given a kingdom in spain. the spanish considered the war with the muslims of brunei and the philippines a repeat of the reconquista. based upon their testimonies this eponym would have already been in use in spain by c. the cultural efflorescence witnessed during this period is now referred to as the spanish golden age. sisebut and suintila completed the expulsion of the byzantines from spain. the overseas colonies began to rebel against spanish rule. the black death of 1348 and 1349 devastated spain. it met as one body and its members represented the entire spanish empire. these wars left spain depleted and impoverished. in 1879 the spanish socialist workers party was founded. by 1700 spain had lost much of its territory and influence. that year the spanish socialist workers party psoe came to power the first left wing government in 43 years. projects of agricultural colonisation with new settlements took place in the south of mainland spain. bush in the iraq war and a strong movement against war rose in spanish society. by the end of 1826 the only american colonies spain held were cuba and puerto rico. in 2005 the spanish government legalised same sex marriage becoming the third country worldwide to do so. the napoleonic war left spain economically ruined deeply divided and politically unstable. the bursting of the spanish property bubble in 2008 led to the 2008–16 spanish financial crisis. after world war ii spain was politically and economically isolated and was kept out of the united nations. the portuguese stance is that the territory is de iure portuguese territory and de facto spanish. in may 1982 spain joined nato followed by a referendum after a strong social opposition. since the 1990s some spanish companies have gained multinational status often expanding their activities in culturally close latin america. in 1986 spain joined the european economic community which later became the european union. spanish companies have also expanded into asia especially china and india. in march 2021 spain became the sixth nation in the world to make active euthanasia legal. castile and leon is the spanish leader in rural tourism linked to its environmental and architectural heritage. geography at 505 992 km2 195 365 sq mi spain is the world s fifty second largest country and europe s fourth largest country. in some cases some of the territorial identities may conflict with the dominant spanish culture. spain is a transcontinental country having territory in both europe and africa. the spanish government is offering spanish nationality to sephardic jews. mountains and rivers mainland spain is a rather mountainous landmass dominated by high plateaus and mountain chains. immigration according to the official spanish statistics ine there were 5. the highest point in spain is the teide a 3 718 metre 12 198 ft active volcano in the canary islands. recent polls and surveys suggest that around 30% of the spanish population is irreligious. within the european territory spain has the largest number of plant species 7 600 vascular plants of all european countries. there have been four spanish popes. islam is the official religion of egypt and arabic is its official language. dialect groups egyptian arabic is spoken by 67 million people in egypt. sudanese arabic is spoken by 17 million people in sudan and some parts of southern egypt. this also affects the way that modern standard arabic is pronounced in egypt. the gulf of aqaba in the northeast separates egypt from jordan and saudi arabia. languages the official language of the republic is literary arabic. at approximately 100 million inhabitants egypt is the 14th most populated country in the world. the spoken languages are egyptian arabic 68% sa idi arabic 29% eastern egyptian bedawi arabic 1. modern egypt dates back to 1922 when it gained independence from the british empire as a monarchy. 6% sudanese arabic 0. in 1978 egypt signed the camp david accords officially withdrawing from the gaza strip and recognising israel. contemporary arabic and middle eastern culture is heavily influenced by egyptian literature music film and television. during the neolithic era several predynastic cultures developed independently in upper and lower egypt. since the 7th century arabic has been characterized by diglossia with an opposition between a standard prestige language—i. the badarian culture and the successor naqada series are generally regarded as precursors to dynastic egypt. literary arabic modern standard arabic msa or classical arabic—and diverse vernacular varieties which serve as mother tongues.  3150 bce by king menes leading to a series of dynasties that ruled egypt for the next three millennia. arabic vernaculars do not descend from msa or classical arabic. the first two ruling dynasties of a unified egypt set the stage for the old kingdom period c. arabic is traditionally written with the arabic alphabet a right to left abjad. nevertheless hellenistic culture continued to thrive in egypt well after the muslim conquest. the standardization of arabic reached completion around the end of the 8th century. christianity was brought to egypt by saint mark the evangelist in the 1st century. following the early muslim conquests arabic gained vocabulary from middle persian and turkish. the arabs founded the capital of egypt called fustat which was later burned down during the crusades. ibn mada of cordoba 1116–1196 realized the overhaul of arabic grammar first proposed by al jahiz 200 years prior. by the late 13th century egypt linked the red sea india malaya and east indies. they also publish old and historical arabic manuscripts. the weakening of the economic system combined with the effects of plague left egypt vulnerable to foreign invasion. this gave rise to what western scholars call modern standard arabic. between 1687 and 1731 egypt experienced six famines. modern standard arabic msa largely follows the grammatical standards of classical arabic and uses much of the same vocabulary. khedivate of egypt 1867–1914 egypt under the muhammad ali dynasty remained nominally an ottoman province. these dialects and modern standard arabic are described by some scholars as not mutually comprehensible. hussein kamel declared egypt s independence from the ottoman empire assuming the title of sultan of egypt. the energetic mood are almost never used in modern standard arabic. shortly following independence egypt was declared a protectorate of the united kingdom. case distinctions are very rare in arabic vernaculars. when the war began in september 1939 egypt declared martial law and broke off diplomatic relations with germany. colloquial or dialectal arabic refers to the many national or regional varieties which constitute the everyday spoken language. literature the literature of syria has contributed to arabic literature and has a proud tradition of oral and written poetry. the capital and largest city of syria is damascus. the arabic flatbread khubz is always eaten together with meze. syria was under emergency law from 1963 to 2011 effectively suspending the constitutional protections for citizens. since the 7th century arabic has been characterized by diglossia with an opposition between a standard prestige language—i. syria is a member of one international organization other than the united nations the non aligned movement. literary arabic modern standard arabic msa or classical arabic—and diverse vernacular varieties which serve as mother tongues. since july 2011 syria has been embroiled in a multi sided civil war with the involvement of different countries. arabic vernaculars do not descend from msa or classical arabic. the earliest recorded indigenous civilization in the region was the kingdom of ebla near present day idlib northern syria. arabic is traditionally written with the arabic alphabet a right to left abjad. syria was called the land of the amurru amorites by their assyro babylonian neighbors. the standardization of arabic reached completion around the end of the 8th century. the assyrians named their colonies of syria and lebanon eber nari. following the early muslim conquests arabic gained vocabulary from middle persian and turkish. during the fall of assyria the scythians ravaged and plundered much of syria. ibn mada of cordoba 1116–1196 realized the overhaul of arabic grammar first proposed by al jahiz 200 years prior. the last stand of the assyrian army was at carchemish in northern syria in 605 bc. they also publish old and historical arabic manuscripts. control of syria eventually passed from the romans to the byzantines with the split in the roman empire. this gave rise to what western scholars call modern standard arabic. by ad 640 syria was conquered by the arab rashidun army led by khalid ibn al walid. modern standard arabic msa largely follows the grammatical standards of classical arabic and uses much of the same vocabulary. french mandate in 1920 a short lived independent kingdom of syria was established under faisal i of the hashemite family. these dialects and modern standard arabic are described by some scholars as not mutually comprehensible. however his rule over syria ended after only a few months following the battle of maysalun. the energetic mood are almost never used in modern standard arabic. he returned to syria in 1937 after the signing of the syrian french treaty. case distinctions are very rare in arabic vernaculars. in november 1956 as a direct result of the suez crisis syria signed a pact with the soviet union. colloquial or dialectal arabic refers to the many national or regional varieties which constitute the everyday spoken language. syria seceded from the union with egypt on 28 september 1961 after a coup. hassaniya arabic and maltese are only varieties of modern arabic to have acquired official status. in the first half of 1967 a low key state of war existed between syria and israel. even during muhammad s lifetime there were dialects of spoken arabic. on 6 october 1973 syria and egypt initiated the yom kippur war against israel. it is this phonology that underlies the modern pronunciation of classical arabic. syria participated in the multilateral madrid conference of 1991 and during the 1990s engaged in negotiations with israel. arabic speakers often improve their familiarity with other dialects via music or film. in 2005 syria ended its military presence in lebanon. arabic language schools exist to assist students to learn arabic outside the academic world. language although australia has no official language english is the de facto national language. australia is the oldest flattest and driest inhabited continent with the least fertile soils. at the 2021 census english was the only language spoken in the home for 72% of the population. australia s written history commenced with the european maritime exploration of australia. australia has since maintained a stable liberal democratic political system and wealthy market economy. politically australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy comprising six states and ten territories. australia is a highly developed country with a high income economy. australia is a regional power and has the world s thirteenth highest military expenditure. several sixteenth century cartographers used the word australia on maps but not to identify modern australia. colloquial names for australia include "oz" and "the land down under" usually shortened to just "down under" . south australia was founded as a "free province" — it was never a penal colony. britain s statute of westminster 1931 formally ended most of the constitutional links between australia and the united kingdom. from 1939 to 1945 australia joined the allies in fighting the second world war. since 1951 australia has been a formal military ally of the united states under the anzus treaty. mainland australia lies between latitudes 9° and 44° south and longitudes 112° and 154° east. australia is the driest inhabited continent its annual rainfall averaged over continental area is less than 500 mm. mount augustus claimed to be the world s largest monolith is located in western australia. at the heart of the country are the uplands of central australia. the western australian mulga shrublands lie between the interior deserts and mediterranean climate southwest australia. fungi typify that diversity—an estimated 250 000 species—of which only 5% have been described—occur in australia. australia has at least 755 species of reptile more than any other country in the world. besides antarctica australia is the only continent that developed without feline species. australia is also one of 17 megadiverse countries. australia is home to many dangerous animals including some of the most venomous snakes in the world. australia was ranked 21st out of 178 countries in the world on the 2018 environmental performance index. australia ranked fourth in the center for global development s 2021 commitment to development index. australia has a labour force of some 13. according to the australian council of social service the poverty rate of australia exceeds 13. australia had the second highest level of household debt in the world in 2020 after switzerland. australia is the world s 21st largest exporter and 24th largest importer. australia has high levels of competitiveness and economic freedom and is ranked eighth in the human development index. the 2021 travel and tourism competitiveness report ranked australia seventh highest in the world out of 117 countries. in 2020 australia used coal for 62% of all energy 3. science and technology in 2019 australia spent a$35. australia consistently has ranked high in the global innovation index gii . 3% of the world s population australia contributed 4. australia is a key player in supporting space exploration. australia spent around 9. education school attendance or registration for home schooling is compulsory throughout australia. australia has an adult literacy rate that was estimated to be 99% in 2003. a mouse pl mice is a small rodent. squeak is an object oriented class based and reflective programming language. the best known mouse species is the common house mouse mus musculus . this resulted in a new user interface proposed to replace the squeak morphic user interface in the future. the common terms rat and mouse are not taxonomically specific. a model–view–controller mvc interface was the primary ui in squeak versions 3. domestic mice sold as pets often differ substantially in size from the common house mouse. the first version of scratch was implemented in squeak. the best known strain of mouse is the white lab mouse. openqwaq a virtual conferencing and collaboration system is based on squeak. in captivity mice are commonly fed commercial pelleted mouse diet. squeak is also used in the nintendo es operating system license squeak 4. the mouse genome has been sequenced and virtually all mouse genes have human homologs. squeak was originally released by apple under its own squeak license. the mouse has approximately 2. in 2006 apple relicensed squeak twice. in many countries however mouse is no longer a food item. squeak virtual machine the squeak virtual machine is a family of virtual machines vms used in smalltalk programming language implementations. it was believed that mouse eating by the mother would help heal the baby who was ill. other squeak virtual machines cogvm roarvm squeakjs stack interpreter vm rsqueak/vm trufflesqueak see also list of open source programming languages alice software croquet project pharo seaside software references external links official website squeak at curlie. three living species are currently recognised the african bush elephant the african forest elephant and the asian elephant. the trumpet is a brass instrument commonly used in classical and jazz ensembles. elephant intelligence has been compared with that of primates and cetaceans. a musician who plays the trumpet is called a trumpet player or trumpeter. the asian elephant also has dorsal bumps on its head and some patches of depigmentation on its skin. the salpinx was a straight trumpet 62 inches 1 600 mm long made of bone or bronze. platycephus the latter the likely ancestor of the modern asian elephant. construction the trumpet is constructed of brass tubing bent twice into a rounded oblong shape. bones the skeleton of the elephant is made up of 326–351 bones. the pitch of the trumpet can be raised or lowered by the use of the tuning slide. elephant trunks have multiple functions including breathing olfaction touching grasping and sound production. the c trumpet is most common in american orchestral playing where it is used alongside the b♭ trumpet. an adult asian elephant is capable of holding 8. the tubing in the b♭ piccolo trumpet is one half the length of that in a standard b♭ trumpet. when underwater the elephant uses its trunk as a snorkel. deriving from early straight trumpets the renaissance slide trumpet was essentially a natural trumpet with a sliding leadpipe. the sixth and usually final set must last the elephant the rest of its life. some slide trumpet designs saw use in england in the 18th century. elephant teeth have loop shaped dental ridges which are thicker and more diamond shaped in african elephants. the pocket trumpet is a compact b♭ trumpet. tusks the tusks of an elephant are modified second incisors in the upper jaw. it is a hybrid of a trumpet and a flugelhorn pitched in b♭ and using three piston valves. hunting for elephant ivory in africa and asia has led to natural selection for shorter tusks and tusklessness. extended technique contemporary music for the trumpet makes wide uses of extended trumpet techniques. normally the skin of an asian elephant is covered with more hair than its african counterpart. valve tremolo many notes on the trumpet can be played in several different valve combinations. an elephant uses mud as a sunscreen protecting its skin from ultraviolet light. it is increasingly common for composers to specify all sorts of preparations for trumpet. organs the brain of an elephant weighs 4. instruction and method books one trumpet method is jean baptiste arban s complete conservatory method for trumpet cornet . the throat of an elephant appears to contain a pouch where it can store water for later use. in art see also herald and trumpet contest compositions for trumpet birch trumpet muted trumpet wind controller references notes bibliography barclay r. the larynx of the elephant is the largest known among mammals. the trumpet and trombone an outline of their history development and construction 2nd ed. the heart of an elephant weighs 12–21 kg 26–46 lb . the last trumpet a history of the english slide trumpet. the social circle of the female elephant does not necessarily end with the small family unit. trumpet technique. the amboseli elephant population is further divided into the "central" and "peripheral" subpopulations. the trumpet book 1st ed. the official languages of algeria are arabic and berber. with their official numbers currently since 1983 they are economy algeria s currency is the dinar dzd . algeria is a regional power in north africa and a middle power in global affairs. algeria has the world s sixteenth largest oil reserves and the ninth largest reserves of natural gas. algeria was the site of the highest state of development of middle paleolithic flake tool techniques. this life richly depicted in the tassili n ajjer paintings predominated in algeria until the classical period. for several centuries algeria was ruled by the romans who founded many colonies in the region. in algeria the rustamid kingdom was established. the zayyanids retained their control over algeria for 3 centuries. in 1629 pirate ships from algeria raided the faroe islands. in 1792 algiers took back oran and mers el kébir the two last spanish strongholds in algeria. the slave trade and piracy in algeria ceased following the french conquest. the conquest of algeria by the french took some time and resulted in considerable bloodshed. between 1825 and 1847 50 000 french people emigrated to algeria. morocco s claim to portions of western algeria led to the sand war in 1963. both atlas tend to merge in eastern algeria. algeria also has ergs or sand dunes between mountains. algeria also has a small african leopard and saharan cheetah population but these are seldom seen. the fennec fox is the national animal of algeria. algeria had a 2018 forest landscape integrity index mean score of 5. government and politics elected politicians have relatively little sway over algeria. algeria has universal suffrage at 18 years of age. in 2009 the french government agreed to compensate victims of nuclear tests in algeria. on 24 august 2021 algeria announced the break of diplomatic relations with morocco.the dinar (arabic: دينار جزائري, romanized: dīnār ǧazāʾirī, berber languages: ⴷⵉⵏⴰⵕ ⴰⴷⵣⴰⵢⵔⵉ; sign: da; code: dzd) is the monetary currency of algeria and it is subdivided into 100 centimes. etymology\nthe name "dinar" is ultimately derived from the roman denarius. history\nthe dinar was introduced on 1 april 1964, replacing the algerian new franc at par. exchange rates\nthe official exchange rate set by the central bank of algerian: algerian dinar to u. the real exchange rate of the algerian dinar to u. argotic counting system\nthe masses rarely use the dinar as such, but the franc (officially the centime; one hundredth of a dinar) and the doro (one twentieth of a dinar). in traditional selling places such as the vegetable market or in the case of street vendors, prices are displayed in francs, in more modern shops the prices are displayed in dinars but the franc is used in speech. coins\nin 1964, coins in denominations of 1, 2, 5, 10, 20 and 50 centimes, and 1 dinar were introduced, with the 1, 2 and 5 centimes struck in aluminium, the 10, 20 and 50 centimes in aluminium bronze and the 1 dinar in cupro-nickel. in 1992, a new series of coins was introduced consisting of 1⁄4, 1⁄2, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 dinars. a 200 dinar bi-metallic coin was issued in 2012 to commemorate algeria\'s 50th anniversary of independence. the 10, 20, 50, 100, and 200 dinar coins are bimetallic.algeria has the second largest military in north africa with the largest defence budget in africa $10 billion . russia is also building two 636 type diesel submarines for algeria. " in december 2016 the euro mediterranean human rights monitor issued a report regarding violation of media freedom in algeria. homosexuality is illegal in algeria. algeria showed largest lgbt acceptance compared to other arab countries where the survey was conducted. as of 2022 the number of turkish companies present in algeria has reached 1 400. in 2020 despite the pandemic more than 130 turkish companies were created in algeria. algeria has the 10th largest reserves of natural gas in the world and is the sixth largest gas exporter. energy information administration reported that in 2005 algeria had 4. access to biocapacity in algeria is lower than world average. in 2016 algeria had 0. in 2016 algeria used 2. 5 times as much biocapacity as algeria contains. as a result algeria is running a biocapacity deficit. besides solar energy areas of research in algeria include space and satellite telecommunications nuclear power and medical research. algeria is also crossed by the trans sahara highway which is now completely paved. newspapers include the wall street journal the new york times and usa today. dollar is the name of more than 20 currencies. photosphotos of the usa. sierra leone the sierra leonean dollar was used from 1791 to 1805. the dollar was pegged to sterling at a rate of 1 dollar = 4 shillings 2 pence. spain the spanish dollar was used from 1497 to 1868. republic of texas the texas dollar was issued between january 1839 and september 1840. dollar. dollar. 5p approx sterling whereas the hong kong dollar was worth only 1s 3d sterling 6p approx . the slovenian tolar had the same etymological origin as dollar that is thaler . the earliest recorded human presence in modern day argentina dates back to the paleolithic period. the peso is the monetary unit of several countries in the americas and the philippines. etymology the description of the region by the word argentina has been found on a venetian map in 1536. originating in the spanish empire the word peso translates to "weight". argentina masculine argentino means in italian " made of silver silver coloured" derived from the latin "argentum" for silver. in most countries the peso uses the same sign "$" as many currencies named "dollar". the name argentina was probably first given by the venetian and genoese navigators such as giovanni caboto. a final alteration in 1772 further reduced the fineness of the peso from 11/12 fine to 130/144 = 0. he also secured the diplomatic recognition of argentina from king kamehameha i of the kingdom of hawaii. 057 g based on the average silver content of worn peso coins. argentina stayed neutral during world war i. 80 known as the peso maria or peso sencillo which was poorly received by the people. isabel perón served as president of argentina from 1974 until 1976 when she was ousted by the military. chinese merchants rejected the new coin discounting it by 4%–5% in favor of the old eight real peso. the national parks of argentina make up a network of 35 national parks in argentina. argentina had a 2018 forest landscape integrity index mean score of 7. climate change in argentina is predicted to have significant effects on the living conditions in argentina.  30  the climate of argentina is changing with regards to precipitation patterns and temperatures. politics in the 20th century argentina experienced significant political turmoil and democratic reversals. following a transition that began in 1983 full scale democracy in argentina was reestablished. argentina is described as a middle power. a prominent latin american and southern cone regional power argentina co founded oei and celac. argentina is a party to the rome statute of the international criminal court. argentina is a major non nato ally since 1998 and an oecd candidate country since january 2022. access to biocapacity in argentina is much higher than world average. in 2016 argentina had 6. in 2016 argentina used 3. this means they use half as much biocapacity as argentina contains. as a result argentina is running a biocapacity reserve. early in the 20th century argentina achieved development and became the world s seventh richest country. argentina has been a major producer of wheat since before 1900. in wine argentina is usually among the 10 largest producers in the world. according to the 2019 list argentina has the 31st most valuable industry in the world u$57. the mining industry of argentina is not as relevant as that of other countries. in addition argentina has since long been one of the top five wine producing countries in the world. the electric output of argentina in 2020 totaled over 6. there are 30 national parks of argentina including many world heritage sites. space research has also become increasingly active in argentina. argentina ranks third in south america in total population fourth in latin america and 33rd globally. argentina is in the midst of a demographic transition to an older and slower growing population. historically the grivna ruble and denga were used in russia as measurements of weight. symbol the ruble sign “₽” is a currency sign used to represent the monetary unit of account in russia. russia russian россия rossiya [rɐˈsʲijə] or the russian federation is a transcontinental country spanning eastern europe and northern asia. additionally the transnistrian ruble is used in transnistria an unrecognized breakaway province of moldova. russia extends across eleven time zones and shares land boundaries with fourteen countries. the silver ruble was used until 1897 and the gold ruble was used until 1917. rus ultimately disintegrated with the grand duchy of moscow growing to become the tsardom of russia. others say the ruble was never part of a grivna but a synonym for it. a new constitution was adopted and russia has since been governed as a federal semi presidential republic. a popular theory deriving the word ruble from rupee is probably not correct. russia possesses the largest stockpile of nuclear weapons and has the fifth highest military expenditure. the weight of one ruble was equal to the weight of one grivna. russia is home to 30 unesco world heritage sites. a wholesome uncut ruble. history early history the first human settlement on russia dates back to the oldowan period in the early lower paleolithic. 90 ozt silver ruble coin equivalent to 100 new copper kopek coins. about 2 million years ago representatives of homo erectus migrated to the taman peninsula in southern russia. apart from one ruble and one kopek coins other smaller and greater coins existed as well. the first trace of an early modern human in russia dates back to 45 000 years in western siberia. english spelling both the spellings ruble and rouble are used in english depending on the author s native dialect. humans reached arctic russia at least 40 000 years ago in mamontovaya kurya. thus one account ruble consisted of 100 novgorod or 200 moscow dengi 68 g 2. the kurgan hypothesis places the volga dnieper region of southern russia and ukraine as the urheimat of the proto indo europeans. 015 ozt thus one ruble was equal to 48 g 1. ultimately by the end of the 16th century russia expanded east of the ural mountains. the amount of silver in a ruble varied in the 18th century. russia continued its territorial growth through the 17th century which was the age of the cossacks. additionally coins worth over a ruble were minted in gold and platinum. throughout his rule sweeping reforms were made which brought significant western european cultural influences to russia. in 1828 platinum coins were introduced with 1 ruble equal to 772⁄3 dolya 3. during the napoleonic wars russia joined alliances with various european powers and fought against france. 161 grams pegging the gold ruble to the french franc at a rate of 1 ruble = 4 francs. the late 19th century saw the rise of various socialist movements in russia. this rate was revised in 1897 to 1 ruble = 22⁄3 francs 17. the 1941–1945 period of world war ii is known in russia as the great patriotic war. this ruble was worth about us$0. post soviet russia 1991–present the economic and political collapse of the soviet union led russia into a deep and prolonged depression. with the founding of the soviet union in 1922 the russian ruble was replaced by the soviet ruble. after the dissolution of the soviet union russia assumed responsibility for settling the latter s external debts. in 1886 a new gold coinage was introduced consisting of 5 and 10 ruble coins. armenia listen officially the republic of armenia is a landlocked country in the armenian highlands of western asia. under the bagratuni dynasty the bagratid kingdom of armenia was restored in the 9th century. the modern republic of armenia became independent in 1991 during the dissolution of the soviet union. while armenia is geographically located in the south caucasus it is generally considered geopolitically european. armenia supports the de facto independent artsakh which was proclaimed in 1991. armenia also recognises the armenian apostolic church the world s oldest national church as the country s primary religious establishment. the exonym armenia is attested in the old persian behistun inscription 515 bc as armina 𐎠𐎼𐎷𐎡𐎴 .the dram (armenian: դրամ; sign: ֏; abbreviation: դր. armenian dram sign\nafter its proclamation of independence, armenia put into circulation its own national currency, the armenian dram; this required a monetary sign. now the dram symbol is included in the armenian standard for the national characters and symbols and in the armenian computer fonts. the current standard sign for the armenian dram (֏, image: ; armenian: դրամ; code: amd) was designed in 1995. in unicode, it is encoded at u+058f ֏ armenian dram sign. third series (2017-present)\na third series of armenian dram banknotes were issued in 2017, to commemorate the 25th anniversary of armenia's national currency. note: rates obtained from these websites may be slightly different from the rates the central bank of armenia publishes\n\nsee also\nartsakh dram\neconomy of armenia\nlist of currencies\nlist of currencies in europe\nlist of circulating currencies\n\nreferences\nexternal links\ncentral bank of armenia\ncentral bank of armenia next day usd to amd exchange rate prediction engine\narmenian dram sign history, shape, and promotion of armenian dram sign\ncoin types from armenia lists, pictures, and values of armenian coin types\ncoins of armenia at ciscoins. it is possible that the name armenia originates in armini urartian for "inhabitant of arme" or "armean country. prior to this during the latter part of the parthian period armenia was a predominantly zoroastrian country. following the battle of avarayr in 451 christian armenians maintained their religion and armenia gained autonomy. in 1045 the byzantine empire conquered bagratid armenia. early modern era during the 1230s the mongol empire conquered zakarid armenia and then the remainder of armenia. after incessant invasions each bringing destruction to the country with time armenia became weakened. in the 16th century the ottoman empire and the safavid dynasty of iran divided armenia. from the early 16th century both western armenia and eastern armenia fell to the safavid empire. this period is known as russian armenia. there was even consideration of making armenia a mandate under the protection of the united states. the armenians of karabakh demanded unification with soviet armenia. on 23 august 1990 armenia declared its sovereignty on its territory. restoration of independence on 21 september 1991 armenia officially declared its statehood after the failed august coup in moscow rsfsr. ter petrosyan led armenia alongside defense minister vazgen sargsyan through the first nagorno karabakh war with neighbouring azerbaijan. in 1993 turkey joined the blockade against armenia in support of azerbaijan. modernity in the 21st century armenia faces many hardships. as of 2016 armenia maintained cordial relations with both countries. "in march 2018 armenian parliament elected armen sarkissian as the new president of armenia. both the armed forces of armenia and azerbaijan reported military and civilian casualties. armenia lies between latitudes 38° and 42° n and meridians 43° and 47° e. climate the climate in armenia is markedly highland continental. waste management in armenia is underdeveloped as no waste sorting or recycling takes place at armenia s 60 landfills. armenia has universal suffrage above the age of eighteen. armenia has a difficult relation with neighbouring countries azerbaijan and turkey. due to its position between two hostile neighbours armenia has close security ties with russia. despite this armenia has also been looking toward euro atlantic structures in recent years. economic projects are being developed between the two nations including a gas pipeline going from iran to armenia. in january 2002 the european parliament noted that armenia may enter the eu in the future. armenia acceded to the nuclear non proliferation treaty npt as a non nuclear weapons state in july 1993. armenia is a member of the collective security treaty organisation csto . as of 2007 armenia includes 915 communities of which 49 are considered urban and 866 are considered rural. access to biocapacity in armenia is lower than world average. in 2016 armenia had 0. iran has an estimated population of 86. arab muslims conquered the empire in the seventh century ad which led to the islamization of iran. today both iran and persia are used in cultural contexts while iran remains mandatory in official state contexts. historical and cultural usage of the word iran is not restricted to the modern state proper. pronunciation the persian pronunciation of iran is [ʔiːˈɾɒːn]. following the premature death of alexander iran came under the control of the hellenistic seleucid empire. reza shah became the new prime minister of iran and was declared the new monarch in 1925. roosevelt and winston churchill—issued the tehran declaration to guarantee the post war independence and boundaries of iran. 1951–1978 mosaddegh mohammad reza pahlavi in 1951 mohammad mosaddegh was appointed as the prime minister of pahlavi iran. after holding a referendum iran officially became an islamic republic in april 1979. the electoral victory of rouhani relatively improved the relations of iran with other countries. iran had a 2019 forest landscape integrity index mean score of 7. wildlife the wildlife of iran includes bears the eurasian lynx foxes gazelles gray wolves jackals panthers and wild pigs. eagles falcons partridges pheasants and storks are also native to iran. it is also home to the world s largest shopping mall iran mall. however iran scored lower than saudi arabia in the 2021 democracy index. president after the supreme leader the constitution defines the president of iran as the highest state authority. chapter ix of the constitution of the islamic republic of iran sets forth the qualifications for presidential candidates. the procedures for presidential election and all other elections in iran are outlined by the supreme leader. local city councils are elected by public vote to four year terms in all cities and villages of iran. he is also the highest judge of the supreme court of iran. the supreme leader of iran appoints and can dismiss the chief justice. among muslim nations iran has an adversarial relationship with saudi arabia due to different political and islamic ideologies. while iran is a shia islamic republic saudi arabia is a conservative sunni monarchy. iran also has around 350 000 reserve force totaling around 900 000 trained troops. according to some estimates iran controlled over 80 000 pro assad shi ite fighters in syria. iran has the largest and most diverse ballistic missile arsenal in the middle east. censorship in iran censorship in iran under the government of the islamic republic was ranked among the most extreme worldwide. iran is ranked as a lower middle income economy by the world bank. as of 2007 iran had earned $70 billion in foreign exchange reserves mostly 80% from crude oil exports. iran has also developed a biotechnology nanotechnology and pharmaceutical industry. about 1 659 000 foreign tourists visited iran in 2004 and 2. since the removal of some sanctions against iran in 2015 tourism has re surged in the country. in 2003 iran ranked 68th in tourism revenues worldwide. domestic tourism in iran is one of the largest in the world. iran air the national airline was founded in 1962 and operated domestic and international flights. transport in iran is inexpensive because of the government s subsidization of the price of gasoline. in 2005 iran spent us$4 billion on fuel imports because of contraband and inefficient domestic use. iran is the world s third country to have developed gtl technology. education science and technology education in iran is highly centralized. bounded by the atlantic ocean on the east brazil has a coastline of 7 491 kilometers 4 655 mi . the brazilian real is the national currency. "in the guaraní language an official language of paraguay brazil is called "pindorama". real sociedad honduras real c. the indigenous population of brazil comprised several large indigenous ethnic groups e. portuguese brazil received more than 2. its size relief climate and natural resources make brazil geographically diverse. including its atlantic islands brazil lies between latitudes 6°n and 34°s and longitudes 28° and 74°w. according to the köppen system brazil hosts six major climatic subtypes desert equatorial tropical semiarid oceanic and subtropical. an equatorial climate characterizes much of northern brazil. over central brazil rainfall is more seasonal characteristic of a savanna climate. in 2020 the government of brazil pledged to reduce its annual greenhouse gases emissions by 43% by 2030. biodiversity and conservation the wildlife of brazil comprises all naturally occurring animals plants and fungi in the south american country. brazil is second only to indonesia as the country with the most endemic species. the rich wildlife of brazil reflects the variety of natural habitats. brazil has a strong interest in conservation as its agriculture sector directly depends on its forests. legislative houses in each political entity are the main source of law in brazil. for most of its democratic history brazil has had a multi party system with proportional representation. brazil has not been invaded since 1865 during the paraguayan war. in 2018 brazil had a record 63 880 murders. the b3 in são paulo is the largest stock exchange in brazil. brazil is the world s 24th largest exporter and 26th largest importer as of 2021. in the food industry brazil was the second largest exporter of processed foods in the world in 2019. in the footwear industry brazil was the fourth largest producer in 2019. in 2018 the chemical industry of brazil was the eighth largest in the world. tourism tourism in brazil is a growing sector and key to the economy of several regions of the country. in the list of world tourist destinations in 2018 brazil was the 48th most visited country with 6. brazil was ranked 57th in the global innovation index in 2021 up from 66th in 2019. brazil became self sufficient in oil in 2006–2007. the são paulo metro was the first underground transit system in brazil. the first census in brazil was carried out in 1872 and recorded a population of 9 930 478. from the 19th century brazil opened its borders to immigration. brazil has the second largest jewish community in latin america making up 0. brazil is believed to have the largest number of uncontacted peoples in the world. brazil has the world s largest catholic population. the cities of boa vista salvador and porto velho have the greatest proportion of irreligious residents in brazil. in 2012 brazil had 1. architecture the architecture of brazil is influenced by europe especially portugal. portuguese colonial architecture was the first wave of architecture to go to brazil. then in the 20th century especially in brasilia brazil experimented with modernist architecture. sweden has a total population of 10. nature in sweden is dominated by forests and many lakes including some of the largest in europe. this led to the forming of the scandinavian kalmar union in 1397 which sweden left in 1523. in 2014 sweden celebrated 200 years of peace a longer span of peacetime than even switzerland. sweden maintains a nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. sweden joined the european union on 1 january 1995 but rejected eurozone membership following a referendum. sweden and its people were first described by publius cornelius tacitus in his written work germania 98 ad . sweden and gothia were two separate nations long before that and since antiquity. still sweden remained a poor and economically backward country in which barter was the primary means of exchange. in the middle of the 14th century sweden was struck by the black death. the population of sweden and most of europe was decimated. this is sometimes considered as the foundation of modern sweden. shortly afterwards the new king rejected catholicism and led sweden into the protestant reformation. the main exports from sweden were iron and copper. swedish empire during the 17th century sweden emerged as a european great power. from 1643 to 1645 during the last years of the war sweden and denmark norway fought the torstenson war. returning to sweden in 1715 charles xii launched two campaigns against norway on 1716 and 1718 respectively. the 1814 campaign was the last time sweden was at war. between 1750 and 1850 the population in sweden doubled. between 1870 and 1914 sweden began developing the industrialised economy that exists today. sweden also supplied steel and machined parts to germany throughout the war. sweden received aid under the marshall plan and participated in the oecd. sweden was one of the founding states of the european free trade area efta . sweden joined the european union on 1 january 1995. sweden also participated in enforcing a un mandated no fly zone over libya during the arab spring. sweden held the chair of the european union from 1 july to 31 december 2009. on 18 october 2022 ulf kristersson of the moderate party became the new prime minister of sweden. to the west is the scandinavian mountain chain skanderna a range that separates sweden from norway. the lowest elevation in sweden is in the bay of lake hammarsjön near kristianstad at −2. about 15% of sweden lies north of the arctic circle. southern sweden is predominantly agricultural with increasing forest coverage northward. sweden also has plenty of long rivers draining the lakes. northern and central sweden have several wide rivers known as älvar commonly sourced within the scandinavian mountains. sweden has much milder winters than many parts of russia canada and the northern united states. sweden receives between 1 100 and 1 900 hours of sunshine annually. despite northerly locations southern and central sweden may have almost no snow in some winters. most of sweden is located in the rain shadow of the scandinavian mountains through norway and north west sweden. sweden is divided in five major vegetation zones. sweden had a 2019 forest landscape integrity index mean score of 5. the local authorities rather than the state make up the larger part of the public sector in sweden. in general those in europe who own large amounts of euro are served by high stability and low inflation. europe covers about 10. the eu established a parliament court and central bank and introduced the euro as a unified currency. europe had a total population of about 745 million about 10% of the world population in 2021. nineteen eu countries share the euro as a common currency. since the age of discovery started by spain and portugal europe played a predominant role in global affairs. the euro is divided into 100 cents. definition contemporary definition the prevalent definition of europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid 19th century. outside europe a number of special territories of eu members also use the euro as their currency. "europe" as used specifically in british english may also refer to continental europe exclusively. additionally over 200 million people worldwide use currencies pegged to the euro. such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term europe by its users. the name euro was officially adopted on 16 december 1995 in madrid. instead the concept of "western civilization" emerged as a way of grouping together europe and these colonies. all nations that have joined the eu since 1993 have pledged to adopt the euro in due course. 8 million years ago in georgia is the earliest hominin to have been discovered in europe. future eurozone members the bulgarian lev is targeted to be replaced by the euro on january 1 2024. the neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans cro magnons who appeared in europe around 43 000 to 40 000 years ago. the romanian leu is targeted to be replaced by the euro sometime in 2029. homo sapiens arrived in europe around 54 000 years ago some 10 000 years earlier than previously thought. euro coins from any member state may be freely used in any nation that has adopted the euro. the earliest sites in europe dated 48 000 years ago are riparo mochi italy geissenklösterle germany and isturitz france . in december 2021 the ecb announced its plans to redesign euro banknotes by 2024. 3200 bce in greece with the minoan civilisation on crete the first advanced civilisation in europe. all intra union transfers in euro are treated as domestic transactions and bear the corresponding domestic transfer costs. east central europe saw the creation of the first slavic states and the adoption of christianity c. the ecb has also set up a clearing system target for large euro transactions. feudalism developed in france in the early middle ages and soon spread throughout europe. history introduction the euro was established by the provisions in the 1992 maastricht treaty. through monasteries and cathedral schools the church was responsible for education in much of europe. they were set so that one european currency unit ecu would equal one euro. in europe itself the church organised the inquisition against heretics. the euro thus became the successor to the european currency unit ecu . the great famine of 1315–1317 was the first crisis that would strike europe in the late middle ages. the european commission also specified a euro logo with exact proportions and foreground and background colour tones. during this period more than 100 plague epidemics swept across europe. in the enduring of this scenario the euro serves as a mean of quantitative primitive accumulation. in the 15th century europe started to extend itself beyond its geographic frontiers. unilateral direct usage the euro has been adopted unilaterally as the sole currency of montenegro and kosovo. in the aftermath of the peace of westphalia france rose to predominance within europe. on 1 january 2010 the dobra of são tomé and príncipe was officially linked with the euro. the yen japanese 円 symbol ¥ code jpy is the official currency of japan. in that year japan adopted a gold exchange standard defining the yen as 0. upon the reversion of okinawa to japan in 1972 the japanese yen then replaced the dollar. japan japanese 日本 nippon or nihon and formally 日本国 nihonkoku is an island country in east asia. the japanese yen is the world s third largest reserve currency after the us dollar and the euro. japan is divided into 47 administrative prefectures and eight traditional regions. the new currency act of 1871 introduced japan s modern currency system with the yen defined as 1. japan has the world s highest life expectancy though it is experiencing a population decline. following world war ii the yen lost much of its prewar value. etymology the name for japan in japanese is written using the kanji 日本 and is pronounced nippon or nihon. when that system was abandoned in 1971 the yen became undervalued and was allowed to float. japan first appears in written history in the chinese book of han completed in 111 ad. since that time however the world price of the yen has greatly decreased. the edo period gave rise to kokugaku "national studies" the study of japan by the japanese. 26 g of fine silver the yen was also defined as 1. the empire of japan invaded other parts of china in 1937 precipitating the second sino japanese war 1937–1945 . fixed value of the yen to the u. in 1940 the empire invaded french indochina after which the united states placed an oil embargo on japan. yen and major currencies float by 1971 the yen had become undervalued. the war cost japan its colonies and millions of lives. dollar at the rate of $1 = 120 b yen. in 1947 japan adopted a new constitution emphasizing liberal democratic practices. the re emergence of trade surpluses drove the yen back up to ¥211 in 1978. the nanpō islands are south and east of the main islands of japan. other major currencies except the swiss franc have been declining relative to the yen. japan has the sixth longest coastline in the world at 29 751 km 18 486 mi . after the war brass 50 sen 1 and 5 yen were introduced between 1946 and 1948. japan has 111 active volcanoes. in 1955 the first unholed nickel 50 yen was introduced. climate the climate of japan is predominantly temperate but varies greatly from north to south. in 1957 silver 100 yen pieces were introduced followed by the holed 50 yen coin in 1959. in the sea of japan region on honshu s west coast northwest winter winds bring heavy snowfall during winter. these were replaced in 1967 by the current cupro nickel 100 yen along with a smaller 50 yen. japan ranks 20th in the 2018 environmental performance index which measures a nation s commitment to environmental sustainability. in 1982 the first cupronickel 500 yen coin was introduced. japan is the world s fifth largest emitter of carbon dioxide. the 1 yen coin is made out of 100% aluminum and can float on water if placed correctly. in 2020 the government of japan announced a target of carbon neutrality by 2050. banknotes the issuance of yen banknotes began in 1872 two years after the currency was introduced. in 2019 japan had the fourth largest diplomatic network in the world. this has helped to keep the value of the yen low compared to other currencies. history the history of the rupee traces back to ancient india circa 3rd century bc. the east india company tried to introduce the rupee in its place. india adopted a new symbol ₹ for the indian rupee on 15 july 2010. india officially the republic of india hindi bhārat gaṇarājya is a country in south asia. the nepalese rupee रू subdivides into one hundred paisa singular and plural or four sukaas. by 1200 bce an archaic form of sanskrit an indo european language had diffused into india from the northwest. the monetary system remained unchanged at one rupee consisting of 64 pice or 192 pies. preserved by a resolutely vigilant oral tradition the rigveda records the dawning of hinduism in india. a corn sheaf replaced the tiger on the one rupee coin. the dravidian languages of india were supplanted in the northern and western regions. the monetary system was retained with one rupee consisting of 16 annas. in the 15th century the vijayanagara empire created a long lasting composite hindu culture in south india. the rupee was now divided into 100 paisa instead of 16 annas or 64 pice. india has been a federal republic since 1950 governed through a democratic parliamentary system. tibet until the middle of the 20th century tibet s official currency was also known as the tibetan rupee. among the socio economic challenges india faces are gender inequality child malnutrition and rising levels of air pollution. each circulating coin of british india until the rupee was decimalised had a different name in practice. temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as india underwent another urbanisation. since 1957 an indian rupee is divided into 100 paise. the sultanate was to control much of north india and to make many forays into south india. the most commonly used symbol for the rupee is "₨". per the london declaration india retained its membership of the commonwealth becoming the first republic within it. the rupee coin has been used since then even during british india when it contained 11. the remaining indian plate survives as peninsular india the oldest and geologically most stable part of india. it extends as far north as the satpura and vindhya ranges in central india. temperatures in india have risen by 0. climate change in india is often thought to be the cause. india is a habitat for 8. it predominates in the tropical moist forest of the andaman islands the western ghats and northeast india. still later mammals entered india from asia through two zoogeographical passes flanking the himalayas. federalism in india defines the power distribution between the union and the states. the prime minister of india is the head of government and exercises most executive power. legislature the legislature of india is the bicameral parliament. aside from ongoing its special relationship with russia india has wide ranging defence relations with israel and france. india conducted its first nuclear weapons test in 1974 and carried out additional underground testing in 1998. in 2008 a civilian nuclear agreement was signed between india and the united states. as a consequence india became the sixth de facto nuclear weapons state. india subsequently signed co operation agreements involving civilian nuclear energy with russia france the united kingdom and canada. the president of india is the supreme commander of the nation s armed forces with 1. india is the world s second largest arms importer between 2016 and 2020 it accounted for 9.historically, krone coins have been minted in denmark since the 17th century. the modern-day krone was introduced as the currency of denmark in january 1875. the parties to the union were the three scandinavian countries, where the name was krone in denmark and norway and krona in sweden, a word which in all three languages literally means ‘crown’. in 2014, it was decided to stop printing of the krone in denmark, but the work would be outsourced, and on 20 december 2016, the last notes were printed by the national bank. current status\nrelationship to the euro\ndenmark has not introduced the euro, following a rejection by referendum in 2000, but the danish krone is pegged closely to the euro (with the rate 7. the first series, 20-krone coins featuring towers in denmark, ran between 2002 and 2007 and spawned ten different motifs. a second series of 20-krone coins, starting in 2007 with twelve different planned motifs and ten already released by november 2011, shows denmark as a maritime nation in the world, featuring iconic danish, faroese and greenlandic ships and like the previous series of tower coins, the series reflect various landmarks in shipbuilding in the three countries. denmark danish danmark pronounced [ˈtænmɑk] listen is a nordic constituent country in northern europe. denmark s currency the krone dkk is pegged at approximately 7. denmark exercises hegemonic influence in the danish realm devolving powers to handle internal affairs. following the napoleonic wars norway was absorbed into sweden leaving denmark with the faroe islands greenland and iceland. denmark remained neutral during world war i but regained the northern half of schleswig in 1920. the inhabitants of denmark are there called tani [danɪ] or "danes" in the accusative. history prehistory the earliest archaeological finds in denmark date back to the eem interglacial period from 130 000 to 110 000 bc. denmark has been inhabited since around 12 500 bc and agriculture has been evident since 3900 bc. some anglo saxon pence of this period have been found in denmark. in 1397 denmark entered into a personal union with norway and sweden united under queen margaret i. later that year denmark entered into a union with norway. in the ensuing peace settlement denmark managed to maintain its independence and regain control of trøndelag and bornholm. denmark tried but failed to regain control of scania in the scanian war 1675–1679 . denmark was defeated and obliged to cede schleswig and holstein to prussia. after these events denmark pursued a policy of neutrality in europe. industrialization industrialisation came to denmark in the second half of the 19th century. after the defeat of germany the versailles powers offered to return the region of schleswig holstein to denmark. iceland severed ties with denmark and became an independent republic in 1944 germany surrendered in may 1945. in 1949 denmark became a founding member of nato. no location in denmark is farther from the coast than 52 km 32 mi . although once extensively forested today denmark largely consists of arable land. denmark holds a forest landscape integrity index mean score of 0. denmark is also home to smaller mammals such as polecats hares and hedgehogs. approximately 400 bird species inhabit denmark and about 160 of those breed in the country. in 2020 denmark was placed first in the index again. government and politics politics in denmark operate under a framework laid out in the constitution of denmark. the recently formed moderates party led by former prime minister rasmussen became the third largest party in denmark. the provinces of denmark are statistical divisions of denmark positioned between the administrative regions and municipalities. following world war ii denmark ended its two hundred year long policy of neutrality. in 2015 denmark contributed 0. denmark also strongly supported american operations in afghanistan and has contributed both monetarily and materially to the isaf. these initiatives are often described by the authorities as part of a new "active foreign policy" of denmark. denmark has the fourth highest ratio of tertiary degree holders in the world. according to the international monetary fund denmark has the world s highest minimum wage. today denmark is part of the european union s internal market which represents more than 508 million consumers. denmark has a corporate tax rate of 22% and a special time limited tax regime for expatriates. denmark has the 2nd lowest relative poverty rate in the oecd below the 11. denmark is a long time leader in wind power in 2015 wind turbines provided 42. in may 2011 denmark derived 3. denmark is connected by electric transmission lines to other european countries. newspapers include the wall street journal the new york times and usa today. dollar is the name of more than 20 currencies. photosphotos of the usa. sierra leone the sierra leonean dollar was used from 1791 to 1805. the dollar was pegged to sterling at a rate of 1 dollar = 4 shillings 2 pence. spain the spanish dollar was used from 1497 to 1868. republic of texas the texas dollar was issued between january 1839 and september 1840. dollar. dollar. 5p approx sterling whereas the hong kong dollar was worth only 1s 3d sterling 6p approx . the slovenian tolar had the same etymological origin as dollar that is thaler . the naira sign ₦ code ngn yoruba náírá tyap nera is the currency of nigeria. nigeria ny jeer ee ə officially the federal republic of nigeria is a country in west africa. 5 billion naira us$144 million contract to guard oil infrastructure. nigeria became a formally independent federation on 1 october 1960. 62 billion naira €400 million in 2019 representing a contribution of 0. nigeria is a regional power in africa and a middle and emerging power in international affairs. one naira is divided into 100 kobo. etymology the name nigeria was taken from the niger river running through the country. there was a government plan to redenominate the naira at 100 1 in 2008 but the plan was suspended. the nok civilization of nigeria thrived between 1 500 bc and ad 200. the currency sign is u+20a6 ₦ naira sign. the yoruba kingdoms of ife and oyo in southwestern nigeria became prominent in the 12th and 14th centuries respectively. however naira as a currency was launched by shehu shagari as minister of finance in 1973. slave routes were established throughout nigeria linking the hinterland areas with the major coastal ports. trades speculated the natural range of the naira would be between ₦280 and ₦350 to the dollar. the territory controlled by the empire included much of modern day northern and central nigeria. in 2019 the naira attained a landmark when for the first time it featured the signature of a woman. administratively nigeria remained divided into the northern and southern protectorates and lagos colony. the nigerian central bank stated that it would make the naira fully convertible against foreign currencies by 2009. southern cameroons opted to join the republic of cameroon while northern cameroons chose to join nigeria. the naira appreciated against the dollar through 2007 due to high oil revenues. babangida s regime has been considered the most corrupt and responsible for creating a culture of corruption in nigeria. how to spot fake naira note coins coins were to be issued in denominations of 1 kobo ₦0. nigeria used part of its oil profits to pay the residual 40% freeing up at least $1. 50 1 naira ₦1 due to inflation nigerian coins are all essentially worthless now. nigeria lies between latitudes 4° and 14°n and longitudes 2° and 15°e. exchange rates the official exchange rate set by the central bank of nigeria naira to u. the highest point in nigeria is chappal waddi at 2 419 m 7 936 ft . the real exchange rate of the naira to the u. the chad basin is fed from the north eastern quarter of nigeria. dollar in nigerian naira. in addition nigeria has numerous coastal rivers. between 1990 and 2005 in total nigeria lost 35. nigeria had a 2019 forest landscape integrity index mean score of 6. in 2022 nigeria suffered 125 deaths from explosions at local illegal refineries. law the constitution of nigeria is the supreme law of the country. the country has a judicial branch the highest court of which is the supreme court of nigeria. foreign relations upon gaining independence in 1960 nigeria made african unity the centrepiece of its foreign policy. nigeria backed the african national congress by taking a committed tough line about the south african government. nigeria retains membership in the non aligned movement. history the state of switzerland took its present form with the adoption of the swiss federal constitution in 1848. since the reformation of the 16th century switzerland has maintained a policy of armed neutrality. switzerland officially the swiss confederation is a landlocked country located at the confluence of western central and southern europe. switzerland has not fought an international war since 1815. swiss independence from the holy roman empire was formally recognised in the peace of westphalia in 1648. beginnings the oldest traces of hominid existence in switzerland date to about 150 000 years ago. the english adjective swiss is a loanword from french suisse also in use since the 16th century. the eastern portion of modern switzerland was integrated into the roman province of raetia. the iso banking code "chf" for the swiss franc and the country top level domain ". modern day switzerland was then divided between the kingdoms of alemannia and burgundy. the first and second century ad was an age of prosperity on the swiss plateau. napoleonic era in 1798 the revolutionary french government invaded switzerland and imposed a new unified constitution. the swiss plateau was finally open to germanic tribes. when war broke out between france and its rivals russian and austrian forces invaded switzerland. by 1200 the swiss plateau comprised the dominions of the houses of savoy zähringer habsburg and kyburg. the sonderbundskrieg had a significant impact on the psychology and society of switzerland. old swiss confederacy the old swiss confederacy was an alliance among the valley communities of the central alps. this new constitution ended the legal power of nobility in switzerland. in 1501 basel and schaffhausen joined the old swiss confederacy. during world war ii detailed invasion plans were drawn up by the germans but switzerland was never attacked. this ended the so called "heroic" epoch of swiss history. between 1940 and 1945 switzerland was bombed by the allies causing fatalities and property damage. the swiss refused to fight alongside the french in the name of the helvetic republic. switzerland joined the council of europe in 1963. in 1803 napoleon organised a meeting of the leading swiss politicians from both sides in paris. switzerland is a founding member of the efta but not the european economic area eea . in 1815 the congress of vienna fully re established swiss independence and the european powers recognised permanent swiss neutrality. switzerland lies between latitudes 45° and 48° n and longitudes 5° and 11° e. swiss troops served foreign governments until 1860 when they fought in the siege of gaeta. switzerland has more than 1500 lakes and contains 6% of europe s freshwater stock. the war convinced most swiss of the need for unity and strength. switzerland contains two small enclaves büsingen belongs to germany while campione d italia belongs to italy. swiss neutrality was seriously questioned by the short lived grimm–hoffmann affair in 1917. switzerland has no exclaves. during the cold war swiss authorities considered the construction of a swiss nuclear bomb. some valley areas in the southern part of switzerland offer cold hardy palm trees. 3% of swiss voters approved a ballot initiative launched by the swiss people s party svp/udc to restrict immigration. however access to biocapacity in switzerland is far lower than the world average. on 27 september 2020 62% of swiss voters rejected the anti free movement referendum by svp. in 2016 switzerland had 1. the majority of the population live on the swiss plateau. military the armed forces of spain are known as the spanish armed forces fuerzas armadas españolas . centralisation and further state building in mainland spain ensued in the 18th century with the bourbon reforms. the spanish colonisation of the americas started with the colonisation of the caribbean. spain has the twelfth highest life expectancy in the world. miscegenation was the rule between the native and the spanish cultures and people. phiros was a grecian by birth but who had been given a kingdom in spain. the spanish considered the war with the muslims of brunei and the philippines a repeat of the reconquista. based upon their testimonies this eponym would have already been in use in spain by c. the cultural efflorescence witnessed during this period is now referred to as the spanish golden age. sisebut and suintila completed the expulsion of the byzantines from spain. the overseas colonies began to rebel against spanish rule. the black death of 1348 and 1349 devastated spain. it met as one body and its members represented the entire spanish empire. these wars left spain depleted and impoverished. in 1879 the spanish socialist workers party was founded. by 1700 spain had lost much of its territory and influence. that year the spanish socialist workers party psoe came to power the first left wing government in 43 years. projects of agricultural colonisation with new settlements took place in the south of mainland spain. bush in the iraq war and a strong movement against war rose in spanish society. by the end of 1826 the only american colonies spain held were cuba and puerto rico. in 2005 the spanish government legalised same sex marriage becoming the third country worldwide to do so. the napoleonic war left spain economically ruined deeply divided and politically unstable. the bursting of the spanish property bubble in 2008 led to the 2008–16 spanish financial crisis. after world war ii spain was politically and economically isolated and was kept out of the united nations. the portuguese stance is that the territory is de iure portuguese territory and de facto spanish. in may 1982 spain joined nato followed by a referendum after a strong social opposition. since the 1990s some spanish companies have gained multinational status often expanding their activities in culturally close latin america. in 1986 spain joined the european economic community which later became the european union. spanish companies have also expanded into asia especially china and india. in march 2021 spain became the sixth nation in the world to make active euthanasia legal. castile and leon is the spanish leader in rural tourism linked to its environmental and architectural heritage. geography at 505 992 km2 195 365 sq mi spain is the world s fifty second largest country and europe s fourth largest country. in some cases some of the territorial identities may conflict with the dominant spanish culture. spain is a transcontinental country having territory in both europe and africa. the spanish government is offering spanish nationality to sephardic jews. mountains and rivers mainland spain is a rather mountainous landmass dominated by high plateaus and mountain chains. immigration according to the official spanish statistics ine there were 5. the highest point in spain is the teide a 3 718 metre 12 198 ft active volcano in the canary islands. recent polls and surveys suggest that around 30% of the spanish population is irreligious. within the european territory spain has the largest number of plant species 7 600 vascular plants of all european countries. there have been four spanish popes.  465  the free thai movement was launched both in thailand and abroad to oppose the government and japanese occupation. after the 2014 thai coup d état thailand had the highest number of lèse majesté prisoners in the nation s history. armed forces the royal thai armed forces กองทัพไทย rtgs kong thap thai constitute the military of the kingdom of thailand. thailand also shares maritime borders with vietnam to the southeast and indonesia and india to the southwest. ratcha anachak thai thai ราชอาณาจักรไทย means kingdom of thailand or kingdom of thai . thailand is classified as a newly industrialised economy with manufacturing agriculture and tourism as leading sectors. the thai people are of the tai ethnic group characterised by common linguistic roots. history prehistory there is evidence of continuous human habitation in present day thailand from 20 000 years ago to the present day. thus thai culture was influenced by indian mon and khmer cultures. promised to protect thailand.  52–3  mainstream thai historians count sukhothai as the first kingdom of thai people. rural farmers gained class consciousness and were sympathetic to the communist party of thailand.  55–6  he is believed have invented thai script and thai ceramics were an important export in his era. thailand had its first elected prime minister in 1988. the advent of the monthon system marked the creation of the modern thai nation state. the 1997 asian financial crisis originated in thailand and ended the country s 40 years of uninterrupted economic growth. 1910–1925 responded by propaganda for the entirety of his reign  402  which promoted the idea of the thai nation. a south thailand insurgency escalated starting from 2004. the thai government declared war on the united states and the united kingdom. geography totalling 513 120 square kilometres 198 120 sq mi thailand is the 50th largest country by total area.  523 the period brought about increasing modernisation and westernisation of thai society. thailand comprises several distinct geographic regions partly corresponding to the provincial groups.  576  the populist thai rak thai party led by prime minister thaksin shinawatra governed from 2001 until 2006. southern thailand consists of the narrow kra isthmus that widens into the malay peninsula. bhumibol the longest reigning thai king died in 2016 and his son vajiralongkorn ascended to the throne. the chao phraya and the mekong river are the indispensable water courses of rural thailand. politics prior to 1932 thai kings were feudal or absolute monarchs. a year in thailand is divided into three seasons. the thai armed forces have a combined manpower of 306 000 active duty personnel and another 245 000 active reserve personnel.  2  most of thailand experiences dry weather with mild temperatures. 5% of 2019 thai gdp. the environmental areas where thailand performs worst i. according to the constitution serving in the armed forces is a duty of all thai citizens. thailand performs best i. critics observed that thai military s main objective is to deal with internal rather than external threats. thailand has had the fourth most coups in the world. the imf predicted that the thai economy would rebound strongly from the low 0. "uniformed or ex military men have led thailand for 55 of the 83 years" between 1932 and 2009. following the thai military coup of 22 may 2014. the current king of thailand is vajiralongkorn or rama x who has reigned since october 2016. in 2017 concluded with information on the thai economy s grew an inflation adjusted 3. the remaining indian plate survives as peninsular india the oldest and geologically most stable part of india. india officially the republic of india hindi bhārat gaṇarājya is a country in south asia. modern humans arrived on the indian subcontinent from africa no later than 55 000 years ago. by 1200 bce an archaic form of sanskrit an indo european language had diffused into india from the northwest. indian movies music and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture. preserved by a resolutely vigilant oral tradition the rigveda records the dawning of hinduism in india. classical sanskrit literature flowered as well and indian science astronomy medicine and mathematics made significant advances. the dravidian languages of india were supplanted in the northern and western regions. medieval india the indian early medieval age from 600 to 1200 ce is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity. in the 15th century the vijayanagara empire created a long lasting composite hindu culture in south india. however disaffection with the company also grew during this time and set off the indian rebellion of 1857. india has been a federal republic since 1950 governed through a democratic parliamentary system. indian films music and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture. among the socio economic challenges india faces are gender inequality child malnutrition and rising levels of air pollution. fully a third of indian plant species are endemic. temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as india underwent another urbanisation. however volcanism and climatic changes later caused the extinction of many endemic indian forms. the sultanate was to control much of north india and to make many forays into south india. the pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered indian wildlife. per the london declaration india retained its membership of the commonwealth becoming the first republic within it. the congress is considered centre left in indian political culture and the bjp right wing. it extends as far north as the satpura and vindhya ranges in central india. it comprises the indian army the indian navy the indian air force and the indian coast guard. temperatures in india have risen by 0. the official indian defence budget for 2011 was us$36. climate change in india is often thought to be the cause. economy according to the international monetary fund imf the indian economy in 2022 was nominally worth $3. india is a habitat for 8. until 1991 all indian governments followed protectionist policies that were influenced by socialist economics. it predominates in the tropical moist forest of the andaman islands the western ghats and northeast india. the 522 million worker indian labour force is the world s second largest as of 2017. still later mammals entered india from asia through two zoogeographical passes flanking the himalayas. at the end of 2011 the indian it industry employed 2. federalism in india defines the power distribution between the union and the states. 5% of indian gdp and contributed 26% of india s merchandise exports. the prime minister of india is the head of government and exercises most executive power. the indian biotech industry grew by 15. legislature the legislature of india is the bicameral parliament. in the 19th century indian writers took a new interest in social questions and psychological descriptions. aside from ongoing its special relationship with russia india has wide ranging defence relations with israel and france. indian dance also features diverse folk and classical forms. sweden has a total population of 10. an independent swedish state emerged during the early 12th century. nature in sweden is dominated by forests and many lakes including some of the largest in europe. vikings the swedish viking age lasted roughly from the eighth century to the 11th century. this led to the forming of the scandinavian kalmar union in 1397 which sweden left in 1523. the swedish vikings called rus are believed to be the founding fathers of kievan rus . in 2014 sweden celebrated 200 years of peace a longer span of peacetime than even switzerland. but there were swedish settlements along the southern coastline of norrland. sweden maintains a nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens. the swedish colonisation of the coastal areas of finland also started during the 12th and 13th century. sweden joined the european union on 1 january 1995 but rejected eurozone membership following a referendum. as a result the peasantry remained largely a class of free farmers throughout most of swedish history. sweden and its people were first described by publius cornelius tacitus in his written work germania 98 ad . however margaret s successors whose rule was also centred in denmark were unable to control the swedish nobility. sweden and gothia were two separate nations long before that and since antiquity. history now views gustav i as the father of the modern swedish nation. still sweden remained a poor and economically backward country in which barter was the primary means of exchange. in 1592 gustav vasa s catholic grandson and king of poland sigismund ascended the swedish throne. in the middle of the 14th century sweden was struck by the black death. after more than half a century of almost constant warfare the swedish economy had deteriorated. the population of sweden and most of europe was decimated. the defeat meant the beginning of the end for the swedish empire. this is sometimes considered as the foundation of modern sweden. modern history the swedish east india company ostindiska kompaniet began in 1731. shortly afterwards the new king rejected catholicism and led sweden into the protestant reformation. in 1889 the swedish social democratic party was founded. the main exports from sweden were iron and copper. the swedish diplomat raoul wallenberg and his colleagues ensured the safety of tens of thousands of hungarian jews. swedish empire during the 17th century sweden emerged as a european great power. in the 1980s several key swedish industries were significantly restructured. from 1643 to 1645 during the last years of the war sweden and denmark norway fought the torstenson war. swedish gdp per capita ranking declined during this time. returning to sweden in 1715 charles xii launched two campaigns against norway on 1716 and 1718 respectively. in a 2003 referendum the swedish electorate voted against the country joining the euro currency. the 1814 campaign was the last time sweden was at war. swedish export weapons were also used by the american military in iraq. between 1750 and 1850 the population in sweden doubled. swedish taxation is controlled by the riksdag. between 1870 and 1914 sweden began developing the industrialised economy that exists today. the function of the swedish military was to deter attack. holland and dutch the netherlands is informally referred to as holland in various languages including dutch and english. this means the dutch required nearly six times as much biocapacity as the netherlands contains. the majority of the population of the netherlands is ethnically dutch. the netherlands has a long tradition of learning foreign languages formalised in dutch education laws. the netherlands has an estimated 250 000 buddhists or people strongly attracted to this religion mainly ethnic dutch people. it is the largest of four constituent countries of the kingdom of the netherlands. this was translated as neder landen in contemporary dutch official documents. the four largest cities in the netherlands are amsterdam rotterdam the hague and utrecht. dutch is used as the adjective for the netherlands as in well as the demonym. the netherlands has been a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with a unitary structure since 1848. at first the english language used dutch to refer to any or all speakers of west germanic languages. the netherlands allowed women s suffrage in 1919 and was the first country to legalise same sex marriage in 2001. the new rulers defended dutch trading interests which then developed rapidly. in most romance languages the term "low countries" is officially used as the name for the netherlands. by 1650 the dutch owned 16 000 merchant ships. in other languages holland is the formal name for the netherlands. in south africa the dutch settled the cape colony in 1652. holland can also refer to a region within the netherlands that consists of north and south holland. the policy brought the dutch enormous wealth and made the colony self sufficient. the duke of alba ruthlessly attempted to suppress the protestant movement in the netherlands. the rotterdam blitz forced the main element of the dutch army to surrender four days later. the union of utrecht is seen as the foundation of the modern netherlands. soon after ve day the dutch fought a colonial war against the new republic of indonesia. many economic historians regard the netherlands as the first thoroughly capitalist country in the world. government encouraged emigration efforts to reduce population density prompted some 500 000 dutch people to leave the country after the war. however the southern netherlands had been culturally separate from the north since 1581 and rebelled. floods over the centuries the dutch coastline has changed considerably as a result of natural disasters and human intervention. the netherlands abolished slavery in its colonies in 1863. the executive power is formed by the council of ministers the deliberative organ of the dutch cabinet. that changed in world war ii when nazi germany invaded the netherlands on 10 may 1940. the dutch water boards are among the oldest democratic entities in the world still in existence. political collaborators were members of the fascist nsb the only legal political party in the occupied netherlands. within the dutch town of baarle nassau are 22 belgian exclaves and within those are 8 dutch enclaves. after the war the netherlands left behind an era of neutrality and gained closer ties with neighbouring states. foreign relations the history of dutch foreign policy has been characterised by its neutrality. the netherlands was one of the founding members of benelux and nato. the dutch economy is very open and relies strongly on international trade. in 2002 the euro was introduced as fiat money and in 2010 the netherlands antilles was dissolved. the dutch army was used throughout the dutch empire. the special municipalities are collectively known as the caribbean netherlands. after the defeat of napoleon the dutch army was transformed into a conscription army. military the armed forces of spain are known as the spanish armed forces fuerzas armadas españolas . centralisation and further state building in mainland spain ensued in the 18th century with the bourbon reforms. the spanish colonisation of the americas started with the colonisation of the caribbean. spain has the twelfth highest life expectancy in the world. miscegenation was the rule between the native and the spanish cultures and people. phiros was a grecian by birth but who had been given a kingdom in spain. the spanish considered the war with the muslims of brunei and the philippines a repeat of the reconquista. based upon their testimonies this eponym would have already been in use in spain by c. the cultural efflorescence witnessed during this period is now referred to as the spanish golden age. sisebut and suintila completed the expulsion of the byzantines from spain. the overseas colonies began to rebel against spanish rule. the black death of 1348 and 1349 devastated spain. it met as one body and its members represented the entire spanish empire. these wars left spain depleted and impoverished. in 1879 the spanish socialist workers party was founded. by 1700 spain had lost much of its territory and influence. that year the spanish socialist workers party psoe came to power the first left wing government in 43 years. projects of agricultural colonisation with new settlements took place in the south of mainland spain. bush in the iraq war and a strong movement against war rose in spanish society. by the end of 1826 the only american colonies spain held were cuba and puerto rico. in 2005 the spanish government legalised same sex marriage becoming the third country worldwide to do so. the napoleonic war left spain economically ruined deeply divided and politically unstable. the bursting of the spanish property bubble in 2008 led to the 2008–16 spanish financial crisis. after world war ii spain was politically and economically isolated and was kept out of the united nations. the portuguese stance is that the territory is de iure portuguese territory and de facto spanish. in may 1982 spain joined nato followed by a referendum after a strong social opposition. since the 1990s some spanish companies have gained multinational status often expanding their activities in culturally close latin america. in 1986 spain joined the european economic community which later became the european union. spanish companies have also expanded into asia especially china and india. in march 2021 spain became the sixth nation in the world to make active euthanasia legal. castile and leon is the spanish leader in rural tourism linked to its environmental and architectural heritage. geography at 505 992 km2 195 365 sq mi spain is the world s fifty second largest country and europe s fourth largest country. in some cases some of the territorial identities may conflict with the dominant spanish culture. spain is a transcontinental country having territory in both europe and africa. the spanish government is offering spanish nationality to sephardic jews. mountains and rivers mainland spain is a rather mountainous landmass dominated by high plateaus and mountain chains. immigration according to the official spanish statistics ine there were 5. the highest point in spain is the teide a 3 718 metre 12 198 ft active volcano in the canary islands. recent polls and surveys suggest that around 30% of the spanish population is irreligious. within the european territory spain has the largest number of plant species 7 600 vascular plants of all european countries. there have been four spanish popes. korea consists of the korean peninsula jeju island and several minor islands near the peninsula. korea and japan still dispute the ownership of the dokdo islets located east of the korean peninsula. korea is chiefly populated by a highly homogeneous ethnic group the koreans who speak the korean language. korea korean 한국 hanguk or 조선 joseon is a peninsular region in east asia. tensions between the two resulted in the outbreak of the korean war in 1950. korea was transliterated as cauli in the travels of marco polo of the chinese 高麗 mc kawlej mod. gojoseon according to korean legend dangun a descendant of heaven established gojoseon in 2333 bce. the name korea is now commonly used in english contexts by both north and south korea. in 108 bce the han dynasty defeated gojoseon and installed four commanderies in the northern korean peninsula. in south korea korea as a whole is referred to as hanguk 한국 [haːnɡuk] lit. north–south states period beginning in the 6th century silla s power gradually extended across the korean peninsula. in north korea korea as a whole is referred to as joseon 조선 [tɕosʰʌn] lit. after conquering baekje and goguryeo silla repulsed tang china from the korean peninsula in 676. with the fall of gojoseon southern korea entered the samhan period. at its height balhae s territories extended from southern manchuria down to the northern korean peninsula. three kingdoms the three kingdoms of korea consisted of goguryeo silla and baekje. 1418–50 who personally created and promulgated hangul the korean alphabet. goryeo dynasty goryeo was founded in 918 and replaced silla as the ruling dynasty of korea. in 1897 the joseon dynasty proclaimed the korean empire 1897–1910 . during the goryeo–khitan war the khitan empire invaded korea twice more in 1009 and 1018 but was defeated. the korean liberation movement also spread to neighbouring manchuria and siberia. that same year empress myeongseong of korea was assassinated by japanese agents. nearly 400 000 korean labourers died. the russians were pushed out of the fight for korea following the conclusion of the russo japanese war 1904–1905 . during the japanese annexation the korean language was suppressed in an effort to eradicate korean national identity. korea became a protectorate of japan shortly afterwards. traditional korean culture suffered heavy losses as numerous korean cultural artefacts were destroyed or taken to japan. by the end of world war ii there were over 850 000 japanese settlers in korea. to this day valuable korean artefacts can often be found in japanese museums or among private collections. north korea is a one party state now centred on kim il sung s juche ideology with a centrally planned industrial economy. japanese officials considered returning korean cultural properties but to date this has not occurred. in june 1950 north korea invaded the south using soviet tanks and weaponry. since the 1960s the south korean economy has grown enormously and the economic structure was radically transformed. in november 2020 south korea and china agreed to work together to mend south korea s relationship with north korea. the korean peninsula remained divided the korean demilitarized zone being the de facto border between the two states. the highest mountain in korea is mount paektu 2 744 m through which runs the border with china. during the korean war 1950–53 more than 1. it has been confirmed that siberian tigers are only on the side of north korea now. the southern and southwestern coastlines of the peninsula form a well developed ria coastline known as dadohae jin in korean. it was estimated in 2006 that only 26 700 of the old chinese community now remain in south korea. biodiversity animal life of the korean peninsula includes a considerable number of bird species and native freshwater fish. russia russian россия rossiya [rɐˈsʲijə] or the russian federation is a transcontinental country spanning eastern europe and northern asia. transport and energy railway transport in russia is mostly under the control of the state run russian railways. the russian bear and mother russia are often used as national personifications of the country. russia extends across eleven time zones and shares land boundaries with fourteen countries. in 1991 the russian sfsr emerged from the dissolution of the soviet union as the independent russian federation. rus ultimately disintegrated with the grand duchy of moscow growing to become the tsardom of russia. ranked worldwide the russian economy stands at the ninth largest by nominal gdp and the sixth largest by gdp ppp . a new constitution was adopted and russia has since been governed as a federal semi presidential republic. in the northeast the byzantine slavic traditions of kievan rus were adapted to form the russian autocratic state. russia possesses the largest stockpile of nuclear weapons and has the fifth highest military expenditure. ultimately ukraine was split along the dnieper leaving the eastern part left bank ukraine and kiev under russian rule. russia is home to 30 unesco world heritage sites. during the conflict russian troops overran east prussia reaching berlin. history early history the first human settlement on russia dates back to the oldowan period in the early lower paleolithic. catherine ii "the great" who ruled in 1762–1796 presided over the russian age of enlightenment. about 2 million years ago representatives of homo erectus migrated to the taman peninsula in southern russia. in 1803–1806 the first russian circumnavigation was made. the first trace of an early modern human in russia dates back to 45 000 years in western siberia. in 1820 a russian expedition discovered the continent of antarctica. humans reached arctic russia at least 40 000 years ago in mamontovaya kurya. in 1916 the brusilov offensive of the imperial russian army almost completely destroyed the austro hungarian army. the kurgan hypothesis places the volga dnieper region of southern russia and ukraine as the urheimat of the proto indo europeans. all this formed the climate for the russian revolution of 1917 carried out in two major acts. ultimately by the end of the 16th century russia expanded east of the ural mountains. the provisional government proclaimed the russian republic in september. russia continued its territorial growth through the 17th century which was the age of the cossacks. the russian civil war broke out between the anti communist white movement and the bolsheviks with its red army. throughout his rule sweeping reforms were made which brought significant western european cultural influences to russia. millions became white émigrés and the russian famine of 1921–1922 claimed up to five million victims. during the napoleonic wars russia joined alliances with various european powers and fought against france. 3 million of them in the russian sfsr. the late 19th century saw the rise of various socialist movements in russia. terrorist attacks against civilians were carried out by chechen separatists claiming the lives of thousands of russian civilians. the 1941–1945 period of world war ii is known in russia as the great patriotic war. high oil prices and a rise in foreign investment saw the russian economy and living standards improve significantly. post soviet russia 1991–present the economic and political collapse of the soviet union led russia into a deep and prolonged depression. the council of europe also called for an international criminal tribunal to prosecute russian crimes. after the dissolution of the soviet union russia assumed responsibility for settling the latter s external debts. russia s vast coastline along the arctic ocean and the russian arctic islands have a polar climate. putin s rule increased stability while transforming russia into an authoritarian state. approximately 1 100 rare and endangered plant and animal species are included in the russian red data book. various germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern germany since classical antiquity. during the 16th century northern german regions became the centre of the protestant reformation. in 962 the kingdom of germany formed the bulk of the holy roman empire. the german term deutschland originally diutisciu land the german lands is derived from deutsch cf. ancient humans were present in germany at least 600 000 years ago. the nebra sky disk created during the european bronze age has been attributed to a german site. however under wilhelm ii germany took an imperialistic course leading to friction with neighbouring countries. under the hohenstaufen emperors 1138–1254 german princes encouraged german settlement to the south and east ostsiedlung . later germany further expanded its colonial empire to include holdings in the pacific and china. members of the hanseatic league mostly north german towns prospered in the expansion of trade. the worldwide great depression hit germany in 1929. from 1740 dualism between the austrian habsburg monarchy and the kingdom of prussia dominated german history. east and west germany after nazi germany surrendered the allies partitioned berlin and germany s remaining territory into four occupation zones. the british repelled german air attacks in the battle of britain in the same year. they were informally known as west germany and east germany. in 1941 german troops invaded yugoslavia greece and the soviet union. west germany was established as a federal parliamentary republic with a "social market economy". german military casualties have been estimated at 5. starting in 1948 west germany became a major recipient of reconstruction aid under the american marshall plan. 3 million and around 900 000 german civilians died. konrad adenauer was elected the first federal chancellor of germany in 1949. in 2009 the german government approved a €50 billion stimulus plan. west germany joined nato in 1955 and was a founding member of the european economic community. the blue cornflower was once a german national symbol. tensions between east and west germany were reduced in the late 1960s by chancellor willy brandt s ostpolitik. the german penal system seeks the rehabilitation of the criminal and the protection of the public. germany is also bordered by the north sea and at the north northeast by the baltic sea. the german government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community. from february 2019 – 2020 average monthly temperatures in germany ranged from a low of 3. in absolute terms german military expenditure is the eighth highest in the world. more than 400 zoos and animal parks operate in germany. research and development efforts form an integral part of the german economy. germany has a low murder rate with 1. the largest german airports are frankfurt airport and munich airport. germany is a member of nato the oecd the g7 the g20 the world bank and the imf. 3 billion to german gdp. germany promotes the creation of a more unified european political economic and security apparatus. 2 million according to the 2011 german census rising to 83. the governments of germany and the united states are close political allies. german is the most widely spoken first language in the european union with around 100 million native speakers. modern archaeology and research shows a portuguese root to the celts in portugal and elsewhere. in addition portugal still ruled the asian territories of portuguese india portuguese timor and portuguese macau. in the 20th century portugal engaged in two major conflicts world war i and the portuguese colonial war 1961–1974 . in september 2013 the portuguese government reviewed again the public debt of portugal for 2013 to 127. portugal has approved a credit line for portuguese emigrants aiming to invest in the country on their return. an estimated 800 000 portuguese returned to portugal as the country s african possessions gained independence in 1975. by the 11th and 12th centuries portugale portugallia portvgallo or portvgalliae was already referred to as portugal. 7 million residents and helping to start the portuguese renaissance. history prehistory the early history of portugal is shared with the rest of the iberian peninsula located in south western europe. thus the portuguese empire held dominion over commerce in the indian ocean and south atlantic. the name of portugal derives from the joined romano celtic name portus cale. the portuguese restoration war ended the sixty year period of the iberian union under the house of habsburg. there are still many ruins of castros hill forts throughout modern portugal and remains of the castro culture. this episode is known as the transfer of the portuguese court to brazil. the region became known as portucale portugale and simultaneously portugália – the county of portugal. other episodes during this period of the portuguese presence in africa include the 1890 british ultimatum. at this time portugal covered about half of its present area. the portuguese territories in africa were cape verde são tomé and príncipe portuguese guinea angola and mozambique. with this battle the house of aviz became the ruling house of portugal. political instability and economic weaknesses were fertile ground for chaos and unrest during the first portuguese republic. in 1500 pedro álvares cabral discovered brazil and claimed it for portugal. the outcome was the loss of the remaining portuguese territories in the indian subcontinent. subsequently philip ii of spain claimed the throne and was accepted as philip i of portugal. portugal continued to be governed by a junta de salvação nacional until the portuguese legislative election of 1976. portugal did not lose its formal independence briefly forming a union of kingdoms. in 1996 the country was a co founder of the community of portuguese language countries cplp headquartered in lisbon. in 1640 john iv of portugal spearheaded an uprising backed by disgruntled nobles and was proclaimed king. the portuguese west coast is part of the four major eastern boundary upwelling systems of the ocean. this was the beginning of the house of braganza which reigned in portugal until 1910. portuguese military expenditure in 2009 was 5 billion us$ representing 2. king john v however was not pleased and recalled carvalho e melo to portugal in 1749. law the portuguese legal system is part of the civil law legal system also called the continental family legal system. further titled "marquês de pombal" in 1770 he effectively ruled portugal until joseph i s death in 1777. the panasqueira and neves corvo mines are among the most recognized portuguese mines that are still in operation. napoleonic era with the invasions by napoleon portugal began a slow but inexorable decline that lasted until the 20th century. notable luxury destinations include the portuguese riviera and the comporta coast. in the autumn of 1807 napoleon moved french troops through spain to invade portugal. genetic studies show portuguese populations not to be significantly different from other european populations. thus he returned to portugal but left his son pedro in charge of brazil. despite good economic development in the past three decades the portuguese have been the shortest in europe since 1890. the slavs arrived in the territory of present day slovakia in the fifth and sixth centuries. slovakia is also home to eight unesco world heritage sites. the world s largest per capita car producer slovakia manufactured a total of 1. these ancient tools made by the clactonian technique bear witness to the ancient habitation of slovakia. 200 000 bce discovered near gánovce a village in northern slovakia. biatecs silver coins with inscriptions in the latin alphabet represent the first known use of writing in slovakia. slavic states the slavic tribes settled in the territory of present day slovakia in the fifth century. western slovakia was the centre of samo s empire in the seventh century. in the austro turkish war 1663–1664 a turkish army led by the grand vizier decimated slovakia. thus slovakia seceded from czecho slovakia in march 1939 and allied itself as demanded by germany with hitler s coalition. the territory of slovakia was liberated by soviet and romanian forces by the end of april 1945. out of about 130 000 carpathian germans in slovakia in 1938 by 1947 only some 20 000 remained. slovakia has nevertheless remained a close partner with the czech republic. on 1 january 2009 slovakia adopted the euro as its national currency. the tatra mountain range is represented as one of the three hills on the coat of arms of slovakia. the longest river in slovakia is the váh 403 kilometres [250 mi] the shortest is the čierna voda. the danube is the largest river that flows through slovakia. summer in northern slovakia is usually mild with temperatures around 25 °c 77 °f less in the mountains . the geographical position of slovakia determines the richness of the diversity of fauna and flora. forests cover 44% of the territory of slovakia. over 4 000 species of fungi have been recorded from slovakia. slovakia s highest judicial body is the constitutional court of slovakia ústavný súd which rules on constitutional issues. slovakia accepts the compulsory international court of justice jurisdiction with reservations. slovakia currently has 79 districts. gdp per capita ranges from 188% of eu average in bratislava to 54% in eastern slovakia. slovakia successfully transformed from a centrally planned economy to a market driven economy. the ratio of government debt to gdp in slovakia reached 49. slovakia adopted the euro currency on 1 january 2009 as the 16th member of the eurozone. the euro in slovakia was approved by the european commission on 7 may 2008. hyundai mobis in žilina is the largest suppliers for the automotive industry in slovakia. steel in košice is the largest employer in the east of slovakia with 12 000 employees. slovakia imported electricity mainly from the czech republic 9 961 gwh 73. the two nuclear power plants in slovakia are in jaslovské bohunice and mochovce each of them containing two operating reactors. slovakia has three international airports. it is the second largest international airport in slovakia. the port of bratislava is one of the two international river ports in slovakia. more than 5 4 million tourists visited slovakia in 2017. slovakia contains many castles most of which are in ruins. historical churches can be found in virtually every village and town in slovakia. the oldest sacral buildings in slovakia stem from the great moravian period in the ninth century. etymology the native polish name for poland is polska. following the armistice with germany in november 1918 poland regained its independence as the second polish republic. contemporary poland is a linguistically homogeneous nation with 97% of respondents declaring polish as their mother tongue. poland has a population of 38 million and is the fifth most populous member state of the european union. the history of human activity on polish soil dates to circa 10 000 bc. the etymology alludes to the topography of the region and the flat landscape of greater poland. the origin of the tribe s name lies in the old polish word lęda plain . the transition from paganism in poland was not instantaneous and resulted in the pagan reaction of the 1030s. the country s early origins were described by gallus anonymus in gesta principum polonorum the oldest polish chronicle. in 1592 sigismund iii of poland succeeded his father john vasa in sweden. during the polish golden age the nation s economy and culture flourished. sigismund s long reign in poland coincided with the silver age. era of insurrections the polish people rose several times against the partitioners and occupying armies. after its collapse congress poland lost its constitutional autonomy army and legislative assembly. the inter war period heralded a new era of polish politics. poland became a member of the visegrád group in 1991 and joined nato in 1999. the soviet nkvd executed thousands of polish prisoners of war inter alia katyn massacre ahead of operation barbarossa. 9 million ukrainian refugees arriving in poland. in the east the soviet backed polish 1st army distinguished itself in the battles for warsaw and berlin. topographically the landscape of poland is characterised by diverse landforms water bodies and ecosystems. altogether 3 million polish jews – approximately 90% of poland s pre war jewry – and between 1. poland also shares the szczecin lagoon and the usedom island with germany. over two million polish inhabitants of kresy were expelled along the curzon line by stalin. the lowest point in poland is situated at raczki elbląskie in the vistula delta which is 1. the polish people s republic polska rzeczpospolita ludowa was officially proclaimed in 1952. climate the climate of poland is temperate transitional and varies from oceanic in the north west to continental in the south east. collectivization in the polish people s republic failed. poland is characterised by warm summers with a mean temperature of around 20 °c 68. the largest polish island on the baltic sea is wolin located within wolin national park. biodiversity phytogeographically poland belongs to the central european province of the circumboreal region within the boreal kingdom. historically the most significant polish legal act is the constitution of 3 may 1791. the region was also home to the extinct aurochs the last individual dying in poland in 1627. in 1918 the second polish republic became one of the first countries to introduce universal women s suffrage. members of the sejm and senate jointly form the national assembly of the republic of poland. polish military tradition is generally commemorated by the armed forces day celebrated annually on 15 august. poland has a low homicide rate at 0. kraków also held royal coronations of most polish kings and monarchs at wawel the nation s chief historical landmark. apart from the european union poland has been a member of nato the united nations and the wto. the polish capital warsaw and its historical old town were entirely reconstructed after wartime destruction. the military is subordinate to the ministry of national defence of the republic of poland. the polish state railways pkp is the dominant railway operator in the country. italy also lost all of its colonial possessions formally ending the italian empire. the italian border that applies today has existed since 1975 when trieste was formally re annexed to italy. philosophy was brought to italy by pythagoras founder of the italian school of philosophy in crotone magna graecia. italian clubs have won 48 major european trophies making italy the second most successful country in european football. italy covers an area of 301 230 km2 116 310 sq mi with a population of about 60 million. the italian princedoms represented a first form of modern states as opposed to feudal monarchies and multinational empires. the franks also helped the formation of the papal states in central italy. this allowed the sardinian government to declare a united italian kingdom on 17 march 1861. the wealth such business brought to italy meant that large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned. italian unification was completed and shortly afterwards italy s capital was moved to rome. liberal period the new kingdom of italy obtained great power status. the italian socialist party constantly increased in strength challenging the traditional liberal and conservative establishment. the subsequent treaty of rome 1924 led to the annexation of the city of fiume to italy. these frustrations contributed to a revival of the italian republican movement. italy also gained a permanent seat in the league of nations s executive council. in 1950 italian somaliland was made a united nations trust territory under italian administration until 1 july 1960. in 1925 italy forced albania to become a de facto protectorate. over 35% of the italian territory is mountainous. in 1939 italy formally annexed albania. many elements of the italian territory are of volcanic origin. italy entered world war ii on 10 june 1940. 5% of the italian territory to which must be added 12% of coasts protected by marine protected areas. in italy and yugoslavia unlike in germany few war crimes were prosecuted. however as of 2005 6 759 species are recorded in the data bank of italian vascular flora. on 8 september italy signed the armistice of cassibile ending its war with the allies. the italian garden was influenced by roman gardens and italian renaissance gardens. hostilities ended on 29 april 1945 when the german forces in italy surrendered. 6% of the italian gdp is produced. consequently in 1949 italy became a member of nato. the italian law enforcement system is complex with multiple police forces. in 2020 italy was severely hit by the covid 19 pandemic. in 2010 the italian military had 293 202 personnel on active duty of which 114 778 are carabinieri. her brothers of italy party formed a right wing government with the far right league and berlusconi s forza italia. the italian army is the national ground defence force. most of the rivers of italy drain either into the adriatic sea or the tyrrhenian sea. the italian navy is a blue water navy. environment after its quick industrial growth italy took a long time to confront its environmental problems. the italian navy in 2014 operates 154 vessels in service including minor auxiliary vessels. italy is the twelfth largest carbon dioxide producer. the italian air force in 2021 operates 219 combat jets. the law is enforced in norway by the norwegian police service. 7 million persons identified as norwegian americans which was larger than the population of ethnic norwegians in norway itself. the remote arctic island of jan mayen and the archipelago of svalbard also form part of norway. in addition the norwegian languages share mutual intelligibility with danish and swedish. the capital and largest city in norway is oslo. harald s realm was mainly a south norwegian coastal state. norway has an extensive coastline facing the north atlantic ocean and the barents sea. the modern day irish cities of dublin limerick and waterford were founded by norwegian settlers. harald v of the house of glücksburg is the current king of norway. the hanseatic league took control over norwegian trade during the 14th century and established a trading centre in bergen. norway maintains close ties with both the european union and the united states. in 1380 olaf haakonsson inherited both the norwegian and danish thrones creating a union between the two countries. norway also has one of the lowest crime rates in the world. however the norwegian council of state was too weak to pull out of the union. the anglo saxons of britain also referred to the kingdom of norway in 880 as norðmanna land. syttende mai is also called norwegian constitution day. bronze age between 3000 and 2500 bc new settlers corded ware culture arrived in eastern norway. king haakon and the norwegian government escaped to rotherhithe in london. during the first four centuries ad the people of norway were in contact with roman occupied gaul. many norwegians and persons of norwegian descent joined the allied forces as well as the free norwegian forces. arriving back in norway in 995 olav landed in moster. this group included 13 ships five aircraft and 500 men from the royal norwegian navy. there he built a church which became the first christian church ever built in norway. more important to the allied war effort however was the role of the norwegian merchant marine. feudalism never really developed in norway or sweden as it did in the rest of europe. in 1973 the norwegian government founded the state oil company statoil now equinor . in 1349 the black death spread to norway and had within a year killed a third of the population. in the norwegian parliamentary election 2017 the centre right government of prime minister erna solberg won re election. norway slipped ever more to the background under the oldenburg dynasty established 1448 . the norwegian shelf large marine ecosystem is considered highly productive. norway took no part in the events which led to swedish independence from denmark in the 1520s. the largest predator in norwegian waters is the sperm whale and the largest fish is the basking shark. the plague left norway very poor. national geographic has listed the norwegian fjords as the world s top tourist attraction. king magnus vii ruled norway until 1350 when his son haakon was placed on the throne as haakon vi. historically both the norwegian labour party and conservative party have played leading political roles. thus upon olaf s accession to the throne of norway denmark and norway entered personal union. her centre right government won re election in the 2017 norwegian parliamentary election. on 2 february 1388 norway followed suit and crowned margaret. the norwegian constitution article 6 states that "for those born before the year 1990 it shall. mexico spanish méxico officially the united mexican states is a country in the southern portion of north america. mexican conservatives asked emperor napoleon iii to place a european monarch as head of state in mexico. the mexican revolution starting in 1910 saw a decade of civil war the "wind that swept mexico. mexico is organized as a federal republic comprising 31 states and mexico city its capital. other mexican indigenous cultures were conquered and gradually subjected to spanish colonial rule. during world war ii mexico also played an important role for the allied war effort. mexican silver pesos became the first globally used currency. in the colonial era 1521–1821 mexico was called new spain. the flag of the newly formed army of the three guarantees has evolved into today s mexican flag. history indigenous civilizations before european contact pre 1519 the prehistory of mexico stretches back millennia. after the forced abdication of the monarch the first mexican republic was established. mexico is the site of the domestication of maize tomato and beans which produced an agricultural surplus. some brought their black slaves which after 1829 was contrary to mexican law. olmec cultural traits diffused through mexico into other formative era cultures in chiapas oaxaca and the valley of mexico. in april 1865 that government began aiding the mexican republic. the aztec of central mexico built a tributary empire covering most of central mexico. republican forces captured him and he was executed in querétaro along with two conservative mexican generals. the national museum of anthrology in mexico city is the showcase of the nation s prehispanic glories. the mexican government ordered a survey of land with the aim of selling it for development. the spanish first learned of mexico during the juan de grijalva expedition of 1518. " mexican revolution 1910–1920 the mexican revolution was a decade long transformational conflict in mexico with consequences to this day. being at the crossroads of trade people and cultures mexico city has been called the "first world city". this included the mexican oil expropriation in march 1938 which nationalized the u. the camino real de tierra adentro connected mexico city with the interior of new spain. and anglo dutch oil company known as the mexican eagle petroleum company. the volatility of the urban poor in mexico city was evident in the 1692 riot in the zócalo. this movement would result in the creation of the state owned mexican oil company pemex. the coup ended what could have been a peaceful process toward political autonomy in mexico. salinas left zedillo s government to deal with the mexican peso crisis requiring a $50 billion imf bailout. instead of attacking guerrero itubide approached guerrero to join forces to seize power in mexico. about 2 500 species are protected by mexican legislations. the spanish crown repudiated the 1821 treaty and did not formally recognize the independence of mexico until 1836. the mexican armed forces are administered by the secretariat of national defense secretaria de defensa nacional sedena . mexico also contended with indigenous groups which controlled territory that mexico claimed in the north. there are two branches the mexican army which includes the mexican air force and the mexican navy. there were few settlers from central mexico moving to this remote and hostile territory. as the gadsden purchase was the last loss of mexican territory.  129–137  the largest blow to mexico was the u. 68 mexican pesos us$5. invasion of mexico in 1846 in the mexican–american war. the mexican satellite system is domestic and operates 120 earth stations. etymology the name for japan in japanese is written using the kanji 日本 and is pronounced nippon or nihon. the edo period gave rise to kokugaku "national studies" the study of japan by the japanese. japan is an ethnically and culturally homogeneous society the japanese people form 98. japan japanese 日本 nippon or nihon and formally 日本国 nihonkoku is an island country in east asia. nihon is typically used in everyday speech and reflects shifts in japanese phonology during the edo period. japan is divided into 47 administrative prefectures and eight traditional regions. this marked the beginning of the heian period 794–1185 during which a distinctly indigenous japanese culture emerged. japan has the world s highest life expectancy though it is experiencing a population decline. the allies convened the international military tribunal for the far east to prosecute japanese leaders for war crimes. japan first appears in written history in the chinese book of han completed in 111 ad. together they are often known as the japanese archipelago. the empire of japan invaded other parts of china in 1937 precipitating the second sino japanese war 1937–1945 . the japanese archipelago is 67% forests and 14% agricultural. in 1940 the empire invaded french indochina after which the united states placed an oil embargo on japan. the main body of japanese statutory law is called the six codes. the war cost japan its colonies and millions of lives. the japanese yen is the world s third largest reserve currency after the us dollar and the euro. in 1947 japan adopted a new constitution emphasizing liberal democratic practices. agriculture and fishery the japanese agricultural sector accounts for about 1. the nanpō islands are south and east of the main islands of japan. 8 million are japanese nationals 2021 estimates . japan has the sixth longest coastline in the world at 29 751 km 18 486 mi . in 2019 92% of the total japanese population lived in cities. japan has 111 active volcanoes. 7 percent of the population is over 65 or one in four out of the japanese population. climate the climate of japan is predominantly temperate but varies greatly from north to south. upper estimates suggest that 84–96 percent of the japanese population subscribe to shinto as its indigenous religion. in the sea of japan region on honshu s west coast northwest winter winds bring heavy snowfall during winter. taoism and confucianism from china have also influenced japanese beliefs and customs. japan ranks 20th in the 2018 environmental performance index which measures a nation s commitment to environmental sustainability. 2% of japanese aged 25 to 64 the second most in the oecd after south korea. japan is the world s fifth largest emitter of carbon dioxide. another significant public health issue is smoking among japanese men. in 2020 the government of japan announced a target of carbon neutrality by 2050. culture contemporary japanese culture combines influences from asia europe and north america. in 2019 japan had the fourth largest diplomatic network in the world. art and architecture the history of japanese painting exhibits synthesis and competition between native japanese esthetics and imported ideas. japan has close economic and military relations with the united states with which it maintains a security alliance. japanese architecture is a combination of local and other influences. as of 2019 japan is a major importer of korean music k pop television k dramas and other cultural products. the shrines of ise have been celebrated as the prototype of japanese architecture. the western australian mulga shrublands lie between the interior deserts and mediterranean climate southwest australia. according to the australian council of social service the poverty rate of australia exceeds 13. australia is the oldest flattest and driest inhabited continent with the least fertile soils. aboriginal australian culture is one of the oldest continuous cultures on earth. australia s written history commenced with the european maritime exploration of australia. this exclusive economic zone does not include the australian antarctic territory. australia has since maintained a stable liberal democratic political system and wealthy market economy. at 2 228 m 7 310 ft mount kosciuszko is the highest mountain on the australian mainland. politically australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy comprising six states and ten territories. the australian continent is moving toward eurasia at the rate of 6 to 7 centimetres a year. australia is a highly developed country with a high income economy. within australian political culture the coalition is considered centre right and the labor party is considered centre left. australia is a regional power and has the world s thirteenth highest military expenditure. independent members and several minor parties have achieved representation in australian parliaments mostly in upper houses. several sixteenth century cartographers used the word australia on maps but not to identify modern australia. australian government debt about $963 billion exceeds 45. colloquial names for australia include "oz" and "the land down under" usually shortened to just "down under" . in addition the australian recent startup ecosystem is growing annually at rates of 5. south australia was founded as a "free province" — it was never a penal colony. in 2018 the average age of the australian population was 38. britain s statute of westminster 1931 formally ended most of the constitutional links between australia and the united kingdom. 15% of the australian population lived overseas one of the lowest proportions worldwide. from 1939 to 1945 australia joined the allies in fighting the second world war. 2% of the australian population identified as being indigenous — aboriginal australians and torres strait islanders. since 1951 australia has been a formal military ally of the united states under the anzus treaty. general australian serves as the standard dialect. mainland australia lies between latitudes 9° and 44° south and longitudes 112° and 154° east. 7% of the student bodies of australian universities. australia is the driest inhabited continent its annual rainfall averaged over continental area is less than 500 mm. since 1788 australian culture has primarily been a western culture strongly influenced by early anglo celtic settlers. mount augustus claimed to be the world s largest monolith is located in western australia. australian booker prize winners include peter carey thomas keneally and richard flanagan. at the heart of the country are the uplands of central australia. ballet and dance are represented by the australian ballet and various state companies. fungi typify that diversity—an estimated 250 000 species—of which only 5% have been described—occur in australia. after world war i hollywood monopolised the industry and by the 1960s australian film production had effectively ceased. australia has at least 755 species of reptile more than any other country in the world. in a film market flooded with foreign content australian films delivered a 7. besides antarctica australia is the only continent that developed without feline species. cuisine most indigenous australian groups subsisted on a simple hunter gatherer diet of native fauna and flora otherwise called bush tucker. italy also lost all of its colonial possessions formally ending the italian empire. the italian border that applies today has existed since 1975 when trieste was formally re annexed to italy. philosophy was brought to italy by pythagoras founder of the italian school of philosophy in crotone magna graecia. italian clubs have won 48 major european trophies making italy the second most successful country in european football. italy covers an area of 301 230 km2 116 310 sq mi with a population of about 60 million. the italian princedoms represented a first form of modern states as opposed to feudal monarchies and multinational empires. the franks also helped the formation of the papal states in central italy. this allowed the sardinian government to declare a united italian kingdom on 17 march 1861. the wealth such business brought to italy meant that large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned. italian unification was completed and shortly afterwards italy s capital was moved to rome. liberal period the new kingdom of italy obtained great power status. the italian socialist party constantly increased in strength challenging the traditional liberal and conservative establishment. the subsequent treaty of rome 1924 led to the annexation of the city of fiume to italy. these frustrations contributed to a revival of the italian republican movement. italy also gained a permanent seat in the league of nations s executive council. in 1950 italian somaliland was made a united nations trust territory under italian administration until 1 july 1960. in 1925 italy forced albania to become a de facto protectorate. over 35% of the italian territory is mountainous. in 1939 italy formally annexed albania. many elements of the italian territory are of volcanic origin. italy entered world war ii on 10 june 1940. 5% of the italian territory to which must be added 12% of coasts protected by marine protected areas. in italy and yugoslavia unlike in germany few war crimes were prosecuted. however as of 2005 6 759 species are recorded in the data bank of italian vascular flora. on 8 september italy signed the armistice of cassibile ending its war with the allies. the italian garden was influenced by roman gardens and italian renaissance gardens. hostilities ended on 29 april 1945 when the german forces in italy surrendered. 6% of the italian gdp is produced. consequently in 1949 italy became a member of nato. the italian law enforcement system is complex with multiple police forces. in 2020 italy was severely hit by the covid 19 pandemic. in 2010 the italian military had 293 202 personnel on active duty of which 114 778 are carabinieri. her brothers of italy party formed a right wing government with the far right league and berlusconi s forza italia. the italian army is the national ground defence force. most of the rivers of italy drain either into the adriatic sea or the tyrrhenian sea. the italian navy is a blue water navy. environment after its quick industrial growth italy took a long time to confront its environmental problems. the italian navy in 2014 operates 154 vessels in service including minor auxiliary vessels. italy is the twelfth largest carbon dioxide producer. the italian air force in 2021 operates 219 combat jets. the northern ireland government requested the british army to aid the police and protect the irish nationalist population. up to 50 000 eastern and central european migrant workers left ireland in response to the irish financial crisis. languages the two official languages of the republic of ireland are irish and english. boxing amateur boxing on the island of ireland is governed by the irish athletic boxing association. irish athletics is an all ireland sport governed by athletics ireland. 1 million living in the republic of ireland and 1. all of the irish kingdoms had their own kings but were nominally subject to the high king. the geography of ireland comprises relatively low lying mountains surrounding a central plain with several navigable rivers extending inland. irish christian scholars excelled in the study of latin and greek learning and christian theology. much of ireland was woodland until the end of the middle ages. from the 9th century waves of viking raiders plundered irish monasteries and towns. gaelic ireland had emerged by the 1st century ad. further it had no standing in the irish legal system. with the acts of union in 1801 ireland became a part of the united kingdom. in 1172 pope alexander iii further encouraged henry to advance the integration of the irish church with rome. northern ireland saw much civil unrest from the late 1960s until the 1990s. the norman rulers and the gaelic irish elites intermarried and the areas under norman rule became gaelicised. in 2020 the united kingdom northern ireland included left what was by then the european union eu . in response the irish parliament passed the statutes of kilkenny in 1367. history prehistoric ireland during the last glacial period and until about 16 000 bc much of ireland was periodically covered in ice. religious allegiance now determined the perception in law of loyalty to the irish king and parliament. since 2021 the earliest evidence of human activity in ireland is dated to 33 000 years ago. the irish government halted export of corn and kept the army in quarters but did little more. the theory holds that there were four separate celtic invasions of ireland. despite assistance from france the rebellion was put down by british and irish government and yeomanry forces. lastly the milesians gaels were said to have reached ireland from either northern iberia or southern gaul. the 19th and early 20th centuries saw the rise of modern irish nationalism primarily among the roman catholic population. late antiquity and early medieval times the earliest written records of ireland come from classical greco roman geographers. the pre eminent irish political figure after the union was daniel o connell. in his later work geography ptolemy refers to ireland as iouernia and to great britain as albion. the irish volunteers split into two groups. the romans referred to ireland by this name too in its latinised form hibernia or scotia. a minority approximately 13 000 retained the irish volunteers name and opposed ireland s involvement in the war. ptolemy records sixteen nations inhabiting every part of ireland in 100 ad. independence during its first decade the newly formed irish free state was governed by the victors of the civil war. the relationship between the roman empire and the kingdoms of ancient ireland is unclear. extinct species include the irish elk the great auk brown bear and the wolf. these raids added to a pattern of raiding and endemic warfare that was already deep seated in ireland. as of 2013 there were 40 million irish americans and 33 million americans who claimed irish ancestry. in 1171 henry arrived in ireland in order to review the general progress of the expedition. this combination of cultural influences is visible in the intricate designs termed irish interlace or celtic knotwork. croatia was first internationally recognized as independent on 7 june 879 during the reign of duke branimir. in 1527 faced with ottoman conquest the croatian parliament elected ferdinand i of austria to the croatian throne. tomislav became the first king by 925 elevating croatia to the status of a kingdom. since 2000 the croatian government has invested in infrastructure especially transport routes and facilities along the pan european corridors. during the succession crisis after the trpimirović dynasty ended croatia entered a personal union with hungary in 1102. the record represents the first document of croatian realms vassal states of francia at the time. history prehistory the area known as croatia today was inhabited throughout the prehistoric period. the military territories became known as the croatian military frontier and were under direct habsburg control. the largest proportion of sites is in the valleys of northern croatia. the croatian parliament supported king charles iii s pragmatic sanction and signed their own pragmatic sanction in 1712. in 9 ad the territory of today s croatia became part of the roman empire. the croatian parliament never ratified the union with serbia and montenegro. this population and territory throughout history was tightly related and connected to croats and croatia. parts of dalmatia were annexed by italy hungary annexed the northern croatian regions of baranja and međimurje. following the decisive ottoman victories croatia was split into civilian and military territories in 1538. in january 1990 the communist party fragmented along national lines with the croatian faction demanding a looser federation. during the hungarian revolution of 1848 croatia sided with austria. serbs living in croatian towns especially those near the front lines were subjected to various forms of discrimination. following the invasion a german italian installed puppet state named the independent state of croatia ndh was established. a majority of croatian voters opted in favour of eu membership in a 2012 referendum. the ndh regime was led by ante pavelić and ultranationalist ustaše a fringe movement in pre war croatia. on 19 october 2016 andrej plenković began serving as croatian prime minister. croatian war of independence as tensions rose croatia declared independence on 25 june 1991. forests are significantly present as they cover 2 490 000 hectares 6 200 000 acres representing 44% of croatian land area. on 15 january 1992 croatia gained diplomatic recognition by the european economic community followed by the united nations. croatian law is divided into two principal areas—private and public law. in december 2011 croatia completed eu accession negotiations and signed an eu accession treaty on 9 december 2011. before eu accession negotiations were completed croatian legislation had been fully harmonised with the community acquis. croatia joined the european union on 1 july 2013. as of 2019 the croatian ministry of foreign affairs and european integration employed 1 381 personnel and expended 765. croatia served on the united nations security council for the 2008–2009 term assuming the presidency in december 2008. international monetary fund data projected that croatian nominal gdp reached $67 84 billion or $17. on 1 april 2009 croatia joined nato. according to eurostat croatian gdp per capita in pps stood at 65% of the eu average in 2019. croatia completed eu accession negotiations in 2011. in 2018 croatian exports were valued at 108 billion kunas €14. croatia joined the european union effective 1 july 2013. the croatian state still controls significant economic sectors with government expenditures accounting for 40% of gdp. the pelješac bridge connects the exclave with mainland croatia. tourism tourism dominates the croatian service sector and accounts for up to 20% of gdp. the perceived threat from anglicisation has prompted efforts to safeguard the position of the french language in france. in the high middle ages france was a powerful but highly decentralised feudal kingdom. the french revolutionary and napoleonic wars shaped the course of european and world history. france performs well in international rankings of education health care and life expectancy. the french nobility played a prominent role in most crusades to restore christian access to the holy land. the borders of modern france roughly correspond to ancient gaul which was inhabited by celtic gauls. french knights also made up the majority in both the hospital and the temple orders. west francia approximated the area occupied by and was the precursor to modern france. during the reign of philip of valois the french monarchy reached the height of its medieval power. thus was established feudalism in france. 4 million french soldiers dead 4% of its population. the war cost france 300 000 casualties. in september 1943 corsica was the first french metropolitan territory to liberate itself from the axis. remembered for numerous wars the so called sun king made france the leading european power. during the conflict the french systematically used torture and repression including extrajudicial killings to keep control of algeria. france became the most populous country in europe and had tremendous influence over european politics economy and culture. a vestige of the colonial empire are the french overseas departments and territories. during his reign france took colonial control of many overseas territories in the americas africa and asia. in the pacific ocean french polynesia the special collectivity of new caledonia wallis and futuna and clipperton island. a prussian army invaded france later in august 1792. as of 2009 french carbon dioxide emissions per capita were lower than that of china. by the end of 1793 the allies had been driven from france. however the plan was abandoned due to fears of burdening french businesses. france in february 1794 abolished slavery in its american colonies but would reintroduce it later. french forests are some of the most diverse in europe comprising more than 140 species of trees. france and the allies emerged victorious against the central powers at a tremendous human and material cost. in contrast the five overseas regions used the french franc and now use the euro. in 1940 france was invaded and quickly defeated by nazi germany. as of 2016 french government debt levels reached 2. france was one of the founding members of nato 1949 . 4% of french gdp. this conflict wracked the country and nearly led to a coup and civil war in france. 2% of the french gdp in 2005. around one million pied noirs and harkis fled from algeria to france upon independence. other eminent french scientists of the period have their names inscribed on the eiffel tower. france has also gradually but fully reintegrated into nato and has since participated in most nato sponsored wars. however like many developed nations the french population is aging the average age is 41. since the 19th century france has received many immigrants. 7 years while about a fifth of french people is 65 or over. due to its shape france is often referred to as l hexagone "the hexagon" . health the french health care system is one of universal health care largely financed by government national health insurance. denmark exercises hegemonic influence in the danish realm devolving powers to handle internal affairs. danish universities offer international students a range of opportunities for obtaining an internationally recognised qualification in denmark. denmark danish danmark pronounced [ˈtænmɑk] listen is a nordic constituent country in northern europe. danish neutrality was violated in world war ii following a swift german invasion in april 1940. following the napoleonic wars norway was absorbed into sweden leaving denmark with the faroe islands greenland and iceland. the danish vikings were most active in the eastern and southern british isles and western europe. denmark remained neutral during world war i but regained the northern half of schleswig in 1920. to mitigate environmental degradation and global warming the danish government has signed the climate change kyoto protocol. the inhabitants of denmark are there called tani [danɪ] or "danes" in the accusative. government the danish parliament is unicameral and called the folketing danish folketinget . history prehistory the earliest archaeological finds in denmark date back to the eem interglacial period from 130 000 to 110 000 bc. the organisational name of danish international development agency danida is often used in particular when operating bilateral aid. denmark has been inhabited since around 12 500 bc and agriculture has been evident since 3900 bc. military denmark s armed forces are known as the danish defence danish forsvaret . some anglo saxon pence of this period have been found in denmark. the minister of defence is commander in chief of the danish defence and serves as chief diplomatic official abroad. in 1397 denmark entered into a personal union with norway and sweden united under queen margaret i. furthermore around 44 500 serve as volunteers in the danish home guard. later that year denmark entered into a union with norway. the danish defence has around 1 400 staff in international missions not including standing contributions to nato snmcmg1. in the ensuing peace settlement denmark managed to maintain its independence and regain control of trøndelag and bornholm. between 2003 and 2007 there were approximately 450 danish soldiers in iraq. denmark tried but failed to regain control of scania in the scanian war 1675–1679 . ranked by turnover in denmark the largest danish companies are a. denmark was defeated and obliged to cede schleswig and holstein to prussia. public policy danes enjoy a high standard of living and the danish economy is characterised by extensive government welfare provisions. after these events denmark pursued a policy of neutrality in europe. because of this "danization process" several persons of inuit ancestry now identify their mother tongue as danish. industrialization industrialisation came to denmark in the second half of the 19th century. danish is more distantly related to german which is a west germanic language. after the defeat of germany the versailles powers offered to return the region of schleswig holstein to denmark. greenlandic or "kalaallisut" is an inuit language and is entirely unrelated to danish. iceland severed ties with denmark and became an independent republic in 1944 germany surrendered in may 1945. modesty and social equality are important parts of danish culture. in 1949 denmark became a founding member of nato. a major feature of danish culture is jul danish christmas . no location in denmark is farther from the coast than 52 km 32 mi . the danish constitution article 2 states that "the monarchy is inherited by men and women". although once extensively forested today denmark largely consists of arable land. in 1666 anders bording the father of danish journalism began a state paper. various germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern germany since classical antiquity. during the 16th century northern german regions became the centre of the protestant reformation. in 962 the kingdom of germany formed the bulk of the holy roman empire. the german term deutschland originally diutisciu land the german lands is derived from deutsch cf. ancient humans were present in germany at least 600 000 years ago. the nebra sky disk created during the european bronze age has been attributed to a german site. however under wilhelm ii germany took an imperialistic course leading to friction with neighbouring countries. under the hohenstaufen emperors 1138–1254 german princes encouraged german settlement to the south and east ostsiedlung . later germany further expanded its colonial empire to include holdings in the pacific and china. members of the hanseatic league mostly north german towns prospered in the expansion of trade. the worldwide great depression hit germany in 1929. from 1740 dualism between the austrian habsburg monarchy and the kingdom of prussia dominated german history. east and west germany after nazi germany surrendered the allies partitioned berlin and germany s remaining territory into four occupation zones. the british repelled german air attacks in the battle of britain in the same year. they were informally known as west germany and east germany. in 1941 german troops invaded yugoslavia greece and the soviet union. west germany was established as a federal parliamentary republic with a "social market economy". german military casualties have been estimated at 5. starting in 1948 west germany became a major recipient of reconstruction aid under the american marshall plan. 3 million and around 900 000 german civilians died. konrad adenauer was elected the first federal chancellor of germany in 1949. in 2009 the german government approved a €50 billion stimulus plan. west germany joined nato in 1955 and was a founding member of the european economic community. the blue cornflower was once a german national symbol. tensions between east and west germany were reduced in the late 1960s by chancellor willy brandt s ostpolitik. the german penal system seeks the rehabilitation of the criminal and the protection of the public. germany is also bordered by the north sea and at the north northeast by the baltic sea. the german government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community. from february 2019 – 2020 average monthly temperatures in germany ranged from a low of 3. in absolute terms german military expenditure is the eighth highest in the world. more than 400 zoos and animal parks operate in germany. research and development efforts form an integral part of the german economy. germany has a low murder rate with 1. the largest german airports are frankfurt airport and munich airport. germany is a member of nato the oecd the g7 the g20 the world bank and the imf. 3 billion to german gdp. germany promotes the creation of a more unified european political economic and security apparatus. 2 million according to the 2011 german census rising to 83. the governments of germany and the united states are close political allies. german is the most widely spoken first language in the european union with around 100 million native speakers.community of slovakia is called slovakian people pertaining to it.slovakians are the West Slavic ethnic group and nation native to Slovakia who share a common ancestry, culture, history and speak Slovak.